This file is  part of Xcolorsel, a multipurpose viewer for X11 rgb.txt files.
                    Copyright (C) 1993, 1994 Michael Weller

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published be the Free Software
Foundation;  either version 2 of the License,  or (at your opinion) any later
version.

This program is  distributed in the hope  that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the  implied warranty of  MERCHANBILITY or FITNESS
FOR  A  PARTICULAR  PURPOSE.   See the  GNU General  Public License  for more
details.

You should have received a copy  of the GNU General Public License along with
this program; if not,  write to the  Free Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass
Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The author can be  reached by means of email  as eowmob@exp-math.uni-essen.de
or eowmob@pollux.exp-math.uni-essen.de or  mat42b@aixrs1.hrz.uni-essen.de.
Michael Weller, Heiderhoefen 116b, D 46049 Oberhausen, Germany.

Part of the files are derived  from the Template Widget of the Athena Widgets
as published  by the  Massachusetts Institute of  Technology.  Actually these
files do not contain any code  by the M.I.T  but only  variable declarations.
Nevertheless these parts of these files are still distributed under the terms
of the M.I.T copyright which are here repeated:

Copyright    Massachusetts Institute of Technology   1987, 1988

Permission to use, copy,  modify, distribute,  and sell this software and its
documentation for  any purpose is hereby  granted without fee,  provided that
the  above  copyright  notice  appear  in  all  copies  and  that  both  that
copyright   notice   and   this  permission   notice  appear  in   supporting
documentation,  and that the  name of M.I.T.  not  be used  in advertising or
publicity  pertaining  to distribution  of  the  software  without  specific,
written  prior  permission.    M.I.T.  makes  no  representations  about  the
suitability  of  this  software  for  any  purpose.   It is provided  "as is"
without express or implied warranty.

M.I.T. DISCLAIMS ALL  WARRANTIES WITH REGARD  TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL
IMPLIED WARRANTIES  OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS,  IN NO EVENT SHALL M.I.T.
BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL,  INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL  DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE,  DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION
OF CONTRACT,  NEGLIGENCE  OR  OTHER  TORTIOUS  ACTION,  ARISING OUT OF  OR IN
CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notice: This release does not contain new  feature above version 1.1, however
a few bug  fixes  are  included that  should cure  the segfaults  on  several
machines and actually also recent Linux QMAGIC executables.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This program  is dedicated to all X11-users that don't  use english  as their
native tongue.  Actually it was  started coz' I was unable  to imagine what a
color like goldenrod would look like.

Based on the Athena Widget Set it builts  an RgbText Widget that inherits all
capabilities from the  AsciiTextWidget, but interprets  each line as line out
of /usr/lib/X11/rgb.txt aka as a color nickname and an RGB specification.
Functionality  to display  these values  in different color formats  together
with a color probe tile and hooks to "grab" colors from the screen and search
similar colors is provided.

xcolorsel is a X-Utility based on this widget that allows you to display such
files ( /usr/lib/X11/rgb.txt by default ) together with tiles showing how the
color  looks on your screen.  Also a programmer may  (like with xfontsel) cut
the color names/definitions in various  formats (Colorformats and formats for
resourcefiles or C-sources) und paste them directly in his source codes.

xcolorsel has also proven his usefulness for finding nice color sets for setup
of colors for my favorite X-tools.

This  version  does  now  work  on  Xservers  with  read-only  colormaps (like
TrueColor) as well.

Be warned!!! I did  this as an exercise to  learn Xaw programming.  I consider
this tool as finished. No further extensions, bug fixes are planned. (But feel
free to mail me your comments or suggestions anyway.  If serious bugs occur or
patches to support  your machine are needed send me your patches.  If they are
context diffs  and use some preprocessor defines to select the patches (either
self  select  a symbol  name  or  (better)  use  one  put  in  by  your  imake
automatically (and please put any #define's in config.h) ). I will put them in
and redistribute a newer version, s.t. only one consistent version is floating
around in the net. But remember: My priority of this project is low.

Notes how to install  can be found in 01-INSTALL,  a copy of the GNU Copyright
under which this software is distributed is in 01-COPYING.

An ASCII-Version of the supplied manpage (xcolorsel.man) is in Xcolorsel.help.

Please  note that this  software was developed  in ANSI-C (using GNU-cc) under
X11R5. It  won't compile  under "standard" K&R C  and I don't  know if it will
compile  under X11R4 or earlier  (if your  computer vendor can't provide X11R5
and an ANSI-C compiler kick his ass and order real workstations next time ;-))
