\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@setfilename af.info
@settitle Af Reference Manual
@c Uncomment this for double-sided printing:
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@c Don't forget to update these!
@set EDITION 0.16
@set VERSION 1.99 Beta
@set UPDATED March 1997

@iftex
@finalout
@end iftex

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Af: (af).                     An advanced mail reader and composer.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format

This file documents Af, an advanced mail reader and composer with a user
interface similar to that of GNU Emacs.

Copyright (C) 1996 Malc Arnold, Kay Dekker.
Derived in parts from the GNU Emacs Manual, Eleventh Edition,
Copyright (C) 1985, 1986, 1987, 1993, 1994, 1995 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
sections entitled ``Distribution'' and ``GNU General Public License''
are included exactly as in the original, and provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``Distribution'' may be included in a
translation approved by the author instead of in the original English,
and the section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' may be included
in a translation approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title Af
@subtitle An advanced. emacs-like mail reader and composer
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for Af version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author by Malc Arnold
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1996, 1997 Malc Arnold, Emma Kemm, Kay Dekker.
Derived in parts from the GNU Emacs Manual, Eleventh Edition,
Copyright @copyright{} 1985, 1986, 1987, 1993, 1994, 1995 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
sections entitled ``Distribution'' and ``GNU General Public License''
are included exactly as in the original, and provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``Distribution'' may be included in a
translation approved by the author instead of in the original English,
and the section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' may be included
in a translation approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
@end titlepage
@page
@ifinfo
@node Top, Distribution, (dir), (dir)
@top The Af Mail Reader

Af is an extensible, customisable, self-documenting real-time mail
reader and composer.  This Info file describes how to read and send mail
with af, and how to customise it.  It corresponds to Af version
@value{VERSION}.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Distribution::        How to get the latest copy of af.
* Copying::		Restrictions on af's distribution and warranty.
* Introduction::        An introduction to af.
* Acknowledgements::	People who have contributed to af.
* Bugs::		How and when to report a bug.
* Future::              What may be coming in the future.

Important Concepts
* E-Mail::		An introduction to electronic mail.
* Screen::		How to interpret what you see on the screen.
* User Input::          The types of input that af handles.
* Keys::		Introduction to keys and key sequences.
* Commands::		Keys run commands which are bound to them.
* Major Modes::         Af has several modes of operation.
* Minor Modes::         Features which can be turned on and off.
* Entering Af::		Starting af from the shell.
* Exiting::		Stopping or killing af.

Fundamental af Commands
* Basics::		The most basic mail-handling commands.
* Typeout::		How to use af's typeout mode.
* Minibuffer::		How to enter arguments that are prompted for.
* Sending Mail::        How to send mail from within af.
* M-x::			Invoking commands by their names.
* Help::		How to ask af for help on itself.

Other Ways to Deal With Messages
* Handling Messages::   What you can do with a message.
* Mark and Region::     How to use the mark and the region.
* Tags::                How to set and use tags in af.
* Killing and Yanking:: Deleting and recovering things.
* Searching::           How to search for text in a buffer.
* Sorting::		Sorting messages within af.
* Narrowing::   	Restricting which messages are displayed.

Commands for Mail Folder Management
* Folders::             How to process files and folders.
* Buffers::             How to create and manage buffers.
* Windows::             Displaying more than one buffer.

How to Customise Af
* Customisation::       The ways in which af can be customised.
* Startup Files::	Save your customisations in a @file{.afrc} file.
* Emulation::   	Emulating some other mailers with af.
* Variables::		Af can be customised with configuration variables.
* Keyboard Macros::     Create new commands by combining existing ones.
* Key Bindings::	Change what keys do keys by binding them.
* Afl::                 An introduction to af's extension language.

Glossary and Indexes
* Glossary::    	An af and electronic mail glossary.
* Key Index::   	An item for each af key sequence.
* Command Index::	An item for each af command.
* Variable Index::	An item for each af variable.
* Concept Index::	An item for each concept.
@end menu

@iftex
@unnumbered Preface

This manual documents the use and simple customisation of the af mail
reader and composer.  The reader is not expected to be a programmer;
simple customisations do not require programming skills.  If you are not
interested in customising then you can ignore the customisation hints.
This manual is primarily intended as a reference manual, but can also be
used as a primer.

To find the documentation on a particular command, look in the index.
Keys (character commands) and command names have separate indexes.
There is also a glossary, with a cross reference for each term.

This manual is available as a printed book and also as an Info file,
which can be browsed on-line using either GNU Emacs or the info program
from the GNU project.  The Info file and the printed book contain
substantially the same text and are generated from the same source
files, which are distributed along with af.
@end iftex

@node Distribution, Copying, Top, Top
@unnumbered Distribution

Af is @dfn{free software}; this means that everyone is free to use it
and free to redistribute it on certain conditions.  Af is not in the
public domain; it is copyrighted and there are restrictions on its
distribution, but these restrictions are designed to permit everything
that a good cooperating citizen would want to do.  What is not allowed
is to try to prevent others from further sharing any version of af that
they might get from you.  The precise conditions are found in the GNU
General Public License that comes with af and also appears following
this section.

The simplest way to get a copy of af is from someone else who has it.
You need not ask for permission to do so, or tell anyone you have done
so; just copy it.  If you have access to the Internet, you can get the
latest version, or a patch to upgrade to the latest version, from the Af
Home Page on the World Wide Web @file{http://www.thing.demon.co.uk/af},
or by anonymous FTP from @file{ftp://ftp.csv.warwick.ac.uk/pub/mail/af}.

@node Copying, Introduction, Distribution, Top
@unnumbered GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
@center Version 2, June 1991

@display
Copyright @copyright{} 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
@end display

@unnumberedsec Preamble

The licenses for most software are designed to take away your freedom to
share and change it.  By contrast, the GNU General Public License is
intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free software---
to make sure the software is free for all its users.  This General
Public License applies to most of the Free Software Foundation's
software and to any other program whose authors commit to using it.
(Some other Free Software Foundation software is covered by the GNU
Library General Public License instead.)  You can apply it to your
programs, too.

When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not price.
Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you have the
freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for this
service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you
want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new
free programs; and that you know you can do these things.

To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid anyone
to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights.  These
restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you
distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it.

For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether gratis
or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that you have.
You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code.
And you must show them these terms so they know their rights.

We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and
(2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy,
distribute and/or modify the software.

Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make certain
that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free
software.  If the software is modified by someone else and passed on, we
want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original, so
that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original
authors' reputations.

Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software patents.
We wish to avoid the danger that redistributors of a free program will
individually obtain patent licenses, in effect making the program
proprietary.  To prevent this, we have made it clear that any patent
must be licensed for everyone's free use or not licensed at all.

The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

@iftex
@unnumberedsec TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@center TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION
@end ifinfo

@enumerate 0
@item
This License applies to any program or other work which contains
a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be distributed
under the terms of this General Public License.  The ``Program'', below,
refers to any such program or work, and a ``work based on the Program''
means either the Program or any derivative work under copyright law:
that is to say, a work containing the Program or a portion of it,
either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated into another
language.  (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in
the term ``modification''.)  Each licensee is addressed as ``you''.

Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not
covered by this License; they are outside its scope.  The act of
running the Program is not restricted, and the output from the Program
is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the
Program (independent of having been made by running the Program).
Whether that is true depends on what the Program does.

@item
You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's
source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you
conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate
copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the
notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty;
and give any other recipients of the Program a copy of this License
along with the Program.

You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and
you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee.

@item
You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion
of it, thus forming a work based on the Program, and copy and
distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1
above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:

@enumerate a
@item
You must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices
stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.

@item
You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that in
whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or any
part thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to all third
parties under the terms of this License.

@item
If the modified program normally reads commands interactively
when run, you must cause it, when started running for such
interactive use in the most ordinary way, to print or display an
announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a
notice that there is no warranty (or else, saying that you provide
a warranty) and that users may redistribute the program under
these conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy of this
License.  (Exception: if the Program itself is interactive but
does not normally print such an announcement, your work based on
the Program is not required to print an announcement.)
@end enumerate

These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole.  If
identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Program,
and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in
themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those
sections when you distribute them as separate works.  But when you
distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based
on the Program, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of
this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the
entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it.

Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest
your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to
exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or
collective works based on the Program.

In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Program
with the Program (or with a work based on the Program) on a volume of
a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under
the scope of this License.

@item
You may copy and distribute the Program (or a work based on it,
under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of
Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following:

@enumerate a
@item
Accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable
source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections
1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or,

@item
Accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three
years, to give any third party, for a charge no more than your
cost of physically performing source distribution, a complete
machine-readable copy of the corresponding source code, to be
distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium
customarily used for software interchange; or,

@item
Accompany it with the information you received as to the offer
to distribute corresponding source code.  (This alternative is
allowed only for noncommercial distribution and only if you
received the program in object code or executable form with such
an offer, in accord with Subsection b above.)
@end enumerate

The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for
making modifications to it.  For an executable work, complete source
code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any
associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to
control compilation and installation of the executable.  However, as a
special exception, the source code distributed need not include
anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary
form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the
operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component
itself accompanies the executable.

If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering
access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent
access to copy the source code from the same place counts as
distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not
compelled to copy the source along with the object code.

@item
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program
except as expressly provided under this License.  Any attempt
otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Program is
void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.
However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under
this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.

@item
You are not required to accept this License, since you have not
signed it.  However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or
distribute the Program or its derivative works.  These actions are
prohibited by law if you do not accept this License.  Therefore, by
modifying or distributing the Program (or any work based on the
Program), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and
all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying
the Program or works based on it.

@item
Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on the
Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the
original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to
these terms and conditions.  You may not impose any further
restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein.
You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties to
this License.

@item
If, as a consequence of a court judgement or allegation of patent
infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues),
conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or
otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not
excuse you from the conditions of this License.  If you cannot
distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this
License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you
may not distribute the Program at all.  For example, if a patent
license would not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Program by
all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then
the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to
refrain entirely from distribution of the Program.

If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under
any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to
apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other
circumstances.

It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any
patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any
such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the
integrity of the free software distribution system, which is
implemented by public license practices.  Many people have made
generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed
through that system in reliance on consistent application of that
system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing
to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot
impose that choice.

This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to
be a consequence of the rest of this License.

@item
If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in
certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the
original copyright holder who places the Program under this License
may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding
those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among
countries not thus excluded.  In such case, this License incorporates
the limitation as if written in the body of this License.

@item
The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions
of the General Public License from time to time.  Such new versions will
be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to
address new problems or concerns.

Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the Program
specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and ``any
later version'', you have the option of following the terms and conditions
either of that version or of any later version published by the Free
Software Foundation.  If the Program does not specify a version number of
this License, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software
Foundation.

@item
If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free
programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to the author
to ask for permission.  For software which is copyrighted by the Free
Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes
make exceptions for this.  Our decision will be guided by the two goals
of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and
of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.

@iftex
@heading NO WARRANTY
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@center NO WARRANTY
@end ifinfo

@item
BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY
FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW@.  EXCEPT WHEN
OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES
PROVIDE THE PROGRAM ``AS IS'' WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE@.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS
TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU@.  SHOULD THE
PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING,
REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

@item
IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING
WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR
REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES,
INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING
OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY
YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER
PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
@end enumerate

@iftex
@heading END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@center END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
@end ifinfo

@page
@unnumberedsec How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs

If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the greatest
possible use to the public, the best way to achieve this is to make it
free software which everyone can redistribute and change under these
terms.

To do so, attach the following notices to the program.  It is safest to
attach them to the start of each source file to most effectively convey
the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least the
``copyright'' line and a pointer to where the full notice is found.

@smallexample
@var{one line to give the program's name and an idea of what it does.}
Copyright (C) 19@var{yy}  @var{name of author}

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2
of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE@.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
@end smallexample

Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper mail.

If the program is interactive, make it output a short notice like this
when it starts in an interactive mode:

@smallexample
Gnomovision version 69, Copyright (C) 19@var{yy} @var{name of author}
Gnomovision comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details
type `show w'.  This is free software, and you are welcome
to redistribute it under certain conditions; type `show c' 
for details.
@end smallexample

The hypothetical commands @samp{show w} and @samp{show c} should show
the appropriate parts of the General Public License.  Of course, the
commands you use may be called something other than @samp{show w} and
@samp{show c}; they could even be mouse-clicks or menu items---whatever
suits your program.

You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or your
school, if any, to sign a ``copyright disclaimer'' for the program, if
necessary.  Here is a sample; alter the names:

@smallexample
@group
Yoyodyne, Inc., hereby disclaims all copyright
interest in the program `Gnomovision'
(which makes passes at compilers) written 
by James Hacker.

@var{signature of Ty Coon}, 1 April 1989
Ty Coon, President of Vice
@end group
@end smallexample

This General Public License does not permit incorporating your program into
proprietary programs.  If your program is a subroutine library, you may
consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary applications with the
library.  If this is what you want to do, use the GNU Library General
Public License instead of this License.

@node Introduction, Acknowledgements, Copying, Top
@unnumbered Introduction

You are reading about af, an advanced, self-documenting, customisable,
real-time display-oriented mail reader and composer.  If you think that
sounds rather like the Emacs editor, you're correct; af is designed to
follow the Emacs paradigm as closely as possible.

We say that af is @dfn{display-oriented} because normally the messages
being read are visible on the screen and are updated automatically as
you type your commands.  @xref{Screen,Display}.

We call it a @dfn{real-time} mail reader because the display is updated
very frequently, usually after each character or pair of characters you
type.  This minimises the amount of information you must keep in your
head as you process your mail.  @xref{Basics}.

We call af advanced because it provides facilities that go beyond
simple reading of messages: viewing multiple mail folders at once,
searching and sorting mailboxes, and dealing with groups of messages
in one operation.

Similarly, we have tried to take care that af complies with any relevant
standards: it conforms closely to @sc{rfc822}, the Internet Standard for
Mail Messages, and will work with such standard Mail Transfer Agents as
@sc{uucp}, sendmail, and @sc{mmdf}; and supports the @sc{pop3} protocol
for reading mail from a remote server.  Af also has limited support for
@sc{mime} mail, which we hope to improve in the future
@footnote{Don't worry if you don't understand this; you don't need to
know about these things to use af}.

@dfn{Self-documenting} means that help about af is available from
within af itself.  You can find out what any command does, or find
all the commands that are relevant to a topic.  @xref{Help}.

@dfn{Customisable} means that you can change the definitions of af
commands in little ways.  For example, if you prefer to include the text
of the original message into the text of a reply to that message, then
you can tell af to do so.  Another sort of customisation is
rearrangement of the command set.  For example, if you prefer the four
basic cursor motion commands (up, down, left and right) on keys in a
diamond pattern on the keyboard, you can rebind the keys that way.
@xref{Customisation}.

@ignore
@c Sadly, this isn't yet true
@dfn{Extensible} means that you can go beyond simple customisation and
write entirely new commands, programs in the afl language to be run by
af's own afl interpreter.  Although only a programmer can write an
extension, anybody can use it afterward.
@end ignore

@node Acknowledgements, Bugs, Introduction, Top
@unnumbered Acknowledgements

Several people have contributed to af's development.  Here's my chance
to thank them for their efforts, and for an attempt at a moment of glory.

@itemize @asis
@item
Malc Arnold (malc@@thing.demon.co.uk) conceived af, did the initial
design work, wrote almost all of the code, and argued passionately in
defence of the interface.
@item
Kay Dekker (kay@@vide.coventry.ac.uk) did a vast amount of design work,
discussing and arguing about features we should support and how the
interface should work.  More af features than I can readily recall were
originally Kay's idea.  He also wrote the manual pages and the first
draft of the user manual, and showed great patience when struggling with
some of the less stable versions of af.
@item
Ian "Vato" Dickinson (idickins@@fore.com) actually suggested turning
af into a full-featured mailer, and had a wealth of suggestions for
features, some of which I've actually implemented.  He also wrote the
first draught of the POP3 and SMTP support code.
@item
Andrew "Vic" Fry (vic@@pootug.demon.co.uk) has contributed insights
about the af interface, as well as enough encouragement and coffee to
keep me going.  He has also ported and tested several versions of af.
@item
Justin Murdock (justin@@vide.coventry.ac.uk) and Dave Berry
(daveb@@harlequin.co.uk) reported many bugs and made many suggestions
as to how features could work better.
@item
Emma Kemm (emma@@thing.demon.co.uk) and Iain Bowen
(alaric@@harlech.demon.co.uk) proofread the manuals and supplied more
much-needed moral support.
@item
Richard Stallman (rms@@gnu.mit.edu) wrote the eleventh edition of the
GNU Emacs manual, from which many parts of this manual have been
derived.  Thanks to the Free Software Foundation for permission to
distribute this manual as a ``derived work''.

Note that this does not imply any endorsement of af by the Free
Software Foundation.
@end itemize

@node Bugs, Future, Acknowledgements, Top
@unnumbered Bugs
@cindex bugs
@cindex reporting bugs

Sometimes you will run into a bug in af.  Although I can't promise that
I can or will fix the bug, and I may not even agree that it is a bug, I
want to hear about problems you encounter.  Often I will agree that they
are bugs and want to fix them.

If af should ever crash (ie fall over with an operating system error
message), or exit back to the shell without warning, then it is
certainly a bug.  Commands doing the ``wrong thing'' are also bugs,
but you should check the manual and help entry for the command carefully
to be sure that the command isn't doing what it is supposed to.

If you think that you've found a bug, it is important to report it, and
to provide enough information with the report to be useful.  The most
useful kind of bug report (except the fix for it) is an exact
description of what commands you type, from entering af until the bug
manifests.  It may also help if you could include a small folder which
triggers the bug, since many af bugs can be related to the data in the
current folders.  It is also important to tell me which version of af
you are using, and what machine it is running on.  You can find out
which version of af you are using by typing
@kbd{M-x af-version @key{RET}}.

At present, I am also interested in any feedback on af.  If you have
comments, praise, criticisms or complaints, then we'd like to hear it.

The best way to send bug reports or comments is to mail them
electronically to the af maintainer at @samp{af-bug@@csv.warwick.ac.uk}.
I don't promise to fix the problem; but if I agree that its a bug then
I'll most likely want to fix it.  And remember that the clearer your
bug report is, the more likely it is that the bug will get fixed
quickly, or indeed at all.

@node Future, E-Mail, Bugs, Top
@unnumbered Future Developments
@cindex future developments
@cindex further developments

@c This needs changing after we get to v2.0
While af is now nearing release, and no additional features are planned
for the near future, this by no means implies that I consider that af is
complete.  There are several major enhancements that af could benefit
from, some of which are loosely planned to be done at some time in the
future.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Commands to allow you to use @sc{pgp} conveniently with af.  @sc{pgp}
stands for Pretty Good Privacy; it is a public-key encryption package
written by Phil Zimmerman.
@item
Much more powerful and better-integrated support for reading @sc{mime}
mail.  Especially the ability to decode and display @sc{mime} mail from
within af, without using an external program.
@item
Facilities for composing @sc{mime} mail: Automatic detection and
encoding of 8-bit or binary messages; facilities for composing multipart
messages and so on.
@item
Support for internationalising af, so that messages are displayed in
the user's native language.  I would need volunteers to actually do
the translations.
@item
Major enhancements to the Afl language, allowing people to write their
own extensions to af.
@item
An X interface with pull-down menus, scroll bars and mouse support.
@item
An additional major mode for reading news, similar to the mail mode
but carefully tailored for convenient news-reading.
@item
Ports to other operating systems, such as @sc{ms-dos} or windows.
@end itemize

If you have any strong preferences about the direction af should take in
the future, or suggestions of other enhancements you think I might like
to consider, then please mail them to me at
@samp{af-bug@@csv.warwick.ac.uk}.

@c Now we include the next several chapters
@include concepts.texi
@include basics.texi
@include message.texi
@include folder.texi
@include custom.texi
@include glossary.texi

@c Finally, the tables of contents
@summarycontents
@contents
@bye

@c $Id: af.texi,v 1.12 1997/04/20 10:30:28 malc Exp $
