.\"	$Id: afalias.man,v 1.10 1997/02/15 12:45:29 malc Exp $
.TH AFALIAS %SEC5%
.SH NAME
Afalias \- alias files for af.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Af
alias files contain alias lines and optional blank lines and comment
lines.  Comment lines begin with a semicolon (;).
.PP
Alias lines look like:
.PP
.RS 4n
alias:real name:address list
.RE
.PP
Aliases are case-insensitive non-NULL ASCII character strings,
with any embedded colons preceded by a backslash.
.br
Real names are: double-quoted strings of non-NULL ASCII characters,
with any embedded double-quotes preceded by a backslash;
or, strings of non-NULL ASCII characters, with characters in the
set ( ) < > [ ] @ , . ; : " % preceded by a backslash; or any
combination of the two.  In general, the obvious works: consult
the Af Reference Manual for the fine detail in doubtful cases.
.br
Address lists are lists of comma-or-space-separated electronic mail
addresses.  For fine detail, consult the Af Reference Manual, and,
if really desperate, RFC 822.
.PP
Alias lines may be folded, with a newline followed by a space or TAB
being equivalent to a single space.  Folding may only occur after the
alias and its following colon.
.SH EXAMPLE
.RS 4n
.nf
; An alias specifying a few users
users:First af users:malc@thing kay@thing vato@thing vicar@thing

; Another alias specifying just one user
malc:Mr Author himself:malc

; A mailing list folded over several lines
testers:Af testing team:Malc Arnold <malc@thing>,
        Kay Dekker <kay@thing>, Ian Dickinson <vato@thing>,
        Emma Kemm <emma@thing>, Andrew Fry <vicar@thing>
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP
$HOME/.afalias
user's af aliases.
.TP
%ETCDIR%/afalias
global af aliases.
.PD
.SH AUTHOR
Malc Arnold.
.SH SEE ALSO
af(%SEC1%), afack(%SEC1%), ``The Af Reference Manual''.
