@c This is part of the af manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1996 Malc Arnold, Emma Kemm, Kay Dekker.
@c Derived in parts from the GNU Emacs Manual, Eleventh Edition,
@c Copyright (C) 1985, 1986, 1987, 1993, 1994, 1995 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file af.texi for copying conditions.

@node Glossary, Key Index, Afl, Top
@unnumbered Glossary

@table @asis
@item Afl
Af's extension language; a small programming language which allows you
to write commands for af.

@item Bind
To bind a key sequence means to give it a binding (q.v.@:).
@xref{Key Bindings}.

@item Binding
A key sequence gets its meaning in af by having a binding, which is a
command (q.v.@:) that is run when the user types that sequence.
@xref{Commands,Binding}.  Customisation often involves rebinding a
character to a different command.  The bindings of all key sequences are
recorded in the keymaps (q.v.@:).  @xref{Keymaps}.

@item Blind Copy
A copy of an outgoing message, sent so someone in such a way that the
other people receiving the message won't know that the person received
a copy.  @xref{Sending Mail}.

@item Body
The body of a mail message is the actual text of the message, excluding
the headers.  @xref{Message Body}.

@item Bouncing
Bouncing a message, means to re-send the message ``as is'' to someone,
while making it appear that the new message is still from the person
who sent the original message.  @xref{Sending Commands}.

@item Buffer
The buffer is the basic mail-reading unit; one buffer corresponds to one
mail folder being read.  You can have several buffers, but at any time
you are processing only one, the `selected' buffer, though several can
be visible when you are using multiple windows (q.v.).  Most buffers are
visiting (q.v.) some folder.  @xref{Buffers}.

@item @kbd{C-}
@kbd{C-} in the name of a character is an abbreviation for Control.
@xref{User Input,C-}.

@item @kbd{C-M-}
@kbd{C-M-} in the name of a character is an abbreviation for
Control-Meta.  @xref{User Input,C-M-}.

@item Carbon Copies
A copy of an outgoing message to someone, with an inference that the
person should not regard the message as being addressed to them.

@item Command
A command is an af function which can be bound to a key.  When you type
a key sequence (q.v.@:), its binding (q.v.@:) is looked up in the
relevant keymaps (q.v.@:) to find the command to run.  Alternatively,
any command can be invoked by name using @kbd{M-x}  @xref{Commands}.

@item Complete Key
A complete key is a key sequence which fully specifies one action to be
performed by af.  For example, @kbd{RET} and @kbd{C-n} and @kbd{M-m} are
complete keys.  Complete keys derive their meanings from being bound
(q.v.@:) to commands (q.v.@:).  Thus, @kbd{RET} is by default bound to a
command to open and read the current message; @kbd{M-m} is by default
bound to a command to begin composing a mail message.  @xref{Keys}.

@item Completion
Completion is what af does when it automatically fills out an
abbreviation for a name into the entire name.  Completion is done for
minibuffer (q.v.@:) arguments when the set of possible valid inputs is
known; for example, on command names, buffer names, and file names.
Completion occurs when @key{TAB}, @key{SPC} or @key{RET} is typed.
@xref{Completion}.

@item Control Character
@sc{ascii} characters with octal codes 0 through 037, and also code
0177, do not have graphic images assigned to them.  These are the
control characters.  To type a control character, hold down the
@key{CTRL} key and type the corresponding non-Control character.
@key{RET}, @key{TAB}, @key{ESC}, @key{LFD} and @key{DEL} are all control
characters.  @xref{User Input}.

@item Copyleft
A copyleft is a notice giving the public legal permission to
redistribute a program or other work of art.  Copylefts are used by
left-wing programmers to give people equal rights, just as copyrights
are used by right-wing programmers to gain power over other people.

The particular form of copyleft used by af is that used by the Free
Software Foundation's project GNU, and is called the GNU General Public
License.  @xref{Copying}.

@item Current Buffer
The current buffer in af is the buffer on which most commands operate.
You can select any af mail buffer as the current one.  @xref{Buffers}.

@item Current Directory
When you specify a file name that does not start with a @samp{/} or a
special prefix character such as @samp{~}, it is interpreted relative to
the current directory.  @xref{File Names}.

@item Current Message
The message point is before.  Many af commands operate on the current
message.  @xref{Point}.

@item Cursor
The cursor is the pointer on the screen which indicates the position
called point (q.v.@:) at which insertion and deletion takes place.  It
may be represented by an arrow pointer or by the terminal's cursor.  The
cursor is on the message (or character in the minibuffer) that follows
point.  Often people speak of `the cursor' when, strictly speaking, they
mean `point'.  @xref{Basics,Minibuffer}.

@item Customisation
Customisation is making minor changes in the way af works.  It is
often done by setting variables (@pxref{Variables}) or by rebinding
key sequences (@pxref{Key Bindings}).

@item Default Argument
The default for an argument is the value that will be assumed if you
do not specify one.  When the minibuffer is used to read an argument,
the default argument is used if you just type @key{RET}.
@xref{Minibuffer}.

@item Default Response
A default response for an argument is a value that is initially inserted
into the minibuffer for you to edit.  @xref{Minibuffer}.

@item @key{DEL}
@key{DEL} is a character that runs the command to delete one character
of text.  @xref{Basics,Basic Editing}.

@item Deletion of Messages
Deleting a message means flagging it to be eliminated from your mail
file.  Until you save (q.v.@:) the buffer, you can still undelete
the messages you have deleted.  @xref{Deleting Messages}.

@item Deletion of Windows
Deleting a window means eliminating it from the screen.  Other windows
expand to use up the space.  The deleted window can never come back,
but no actual text is thereby lost.  @xref{Windows}.

@item Directory
File directories are named collections in the file system, within which
you can place individual files or subdirectories.  @xref{File Names}.

@item E-Mail
See `Electronic Mail'.

@item Electronic Mail
Electronic mail means messages sent from one user to another through the
computer system, to be read at the recipient's convenience.  Af has
commands for composing and sending mail, and for reading and editing the
mail you have received.

@item Echo Area
The echo area is the bottom line of the screen, used for echoing the
arguments to commands, for asking questions, and printing brief messages
(including error messages).  @xref{Echo Area}.

@item Echoing
Echoing is acknowledging the receipt of commands by displaying them (in
the echo area).  Af never echoes single-character key sequences; longer
key sequences echo only if you pause while typing them.
@xref{Echo Area}.

@item Error
An error occurs when an af command cannot execute in the current
circumstances.  When an error occurs, execution of the command will
normally stop, and af reports the error by printing an error message
(q.v.@:).  Then af is ready to read another command.

@item Error Message
An error message is a single line of output displayed by af when the
user asks for something impossible to do (such as, killing a message
when point is at the end of the buffer).  They appear in the echo area,
accompanied by a beep.

@item Envelope
The information used to route a mail message to the correct people.  The
information is usually stored in the message's headers.  @xref{E-Mail}.

@item @key{ESC}
@key{ESC} is a character used as a prefix for typing Meta characters on
keyboards lacking a @key{META} key.  Unlike the @key{META} key (which,
like the @key{SHIFT} key, is held down while another character is
typed), the @key{ESC} key is pressed once and applies to the next
character typed.

@item File Name
A file name is a name that refers to a file.  File names may be relative
or absolute; the meaning of a relative file name depends on the current
directory, but an absolute file name refers to the same file regardless
of which directory is current.  On Unix systems, an absolute file name
starts with a slash (the root directory) or with @samp{~/} or
@samp{~@var{user}/} (a home directory).

@item File Name Component
A file name component names a file directly within a particular
directory.  On Unix systems, a file name is a sequence of file name
components, separated by slashes.  For example, @file{foo/bar} is a file
name containing two components, @samp{foo} and @samp{bar}; it refers to
the file named @samp{bar} in the directory named @samp{foo} in the
current directory.

@item Folder
A file which contains mail messages.  @xref{Folders}.

@item Folder Directory
The directory where folders are stored.  @xref{Folders}.

@item Forwarding
Sending an annotated copy of a mail message to someone other than
the original sender of the message.  @xref{Sending Commands}.

@item Global Keymap
The global keymap (q.v.@:) contains key bindings that are in effect
except when overridden by local key bindings in a major mode's local
keymap (q.v.@:).  @xref{Keymaps}.

@item Header Line
A single line on the screen which shows details of a mail message, and
represents that message in the buffer.  @xref{Screen}.

@item Headers
The part of a message which contains information about the message
itself, rather than the content of the message.  The headers appear at
the start of the message, and are separated from the body (q.v.@:) by a
blank line.

@item Incoming Mailbox
The folder where the system delivers you incoming mail.  @xref{Folders}.

@item Input Event
An input event represents, within af, one action taken by the user on
the terminal.  The only Input Events currently accepted by af are those
for typing characters.  @xref{User Input}.

@item Insertion
Insertion means copying messages or text into a buffer, either from the
keyboard or with some other af command.

@item Keyboard Macro
Keyboard macros are a way of defining new af commands from sequences of
existing ones.  @xref{Keyboard Macros}.

@item Key Sequence
A key sequence (key, for short) is a sequence of input events (q.v.@:)
that are meaningful as a single unit.  If the key sequence is enough to
specify one action, it is a complete key (q.v.@:); if it is not enough,
it is a prefix key (q.v.@:).  @xref{Keys}.

@item Keymap
The keymap is the data structure that records the bindings (q.v.@:) of
key sequences to the commands that they run.  For example, the global
keymap binds the character @kbd{C-n} to the command function
@code{next-line}.  @xref{Keymaps}.

@item Kill Ring
The kill ring is where all messages you have killed recently are saved.
You can reinsert any of the killed messages still in the ring; this is
called yanking (q.v.@:).  @xref{Yanking}.

@item Killing
Killing means erasing messages (or text in the minibuffer), and saving
it on the kill ring so it can be yanked (q.v.@:) later.  Some other
systems call this ``cutting''.  @xref{Killing}.

@item Local Keymap
A local keymap is used in a particular major mode; the key bindings
(q.v.@:) in the current local keymap override global bindings of the
same key sequences.  @xref{Keymaps}.

@item @kbd{M-}
@kbd{M-} in the name of a character is an abbreviation for @key{META},
one of the modifier keys that can accompany any character.
@xref{User Input}.

@item @kbd{M-C-}
@kbd{M-C-} in the name of a character is an abbreviation for
Control-Meta; it means the same thing as @kbd{C-M-}.  If your
terminal lacks a real @key{META} key, you type a Control-Meta character by
typing @key{ESC} and then typing the corresponding Control character.
@xref{User Input,C-M-}.

@item @kbd{M-x}
@kbd{M-x} is the key sequence which is used to call an af command by
name.  This is how you run commands that are not bound to key sequences.
@xref{M-x}.

@item Mail
See `electronic mail'.

@item Mail Aliases
A short mnemonic name which stands for one or more mail addresses.
@xref{Aliases}.

@item Mailbox
See `incoming mailbox'.

@item Major Mode
The Af major modes are a mutually exclusive set of options, each of
which handles different functions within af.  @xref{Major Modes}.

@item Mark
The mark points to a position in the text.  It specifies one end of the
region (q.v.@:), point being the other end.  Many commands operate on
all the text from point to the mark.  Each buffer has its own mark.
@xref{Mark and Region}.

@item Message
A single electronic mail message.  @xref{E-Mail}.

@item Meta
Meta is the name of a modifier bit which a command character may have.
It is present in a character if the character is typed with the
@key{META} key held down.  Such characters are given names that start
with @kbd{Meta-} (usually written @kbd{M-} for short).  For example,
@kbd{M-<} is typed by holding down @key{META} and at the same time
typing @kbd{<} (which itself is done, on most terminals, by holding
down @key{SHIFT} and typing @kbd{,}).  @xref{User Input,Meta}.

@item Meta Character
A Meta character is one whose character code includes the Meta bit.

@item @sc{mime}
A standard for transferring messages that contain information other
then plain @sc{ascii} text.  @xref{Message Body}.

@item Minibuffer
The minibuffer is the window that appears when necessary inside the
echo area (q.v.@:), used for reading arguments to commands.
@xref{Minibuffer}.

@item Minibuffer History
The minibuffer history records the text you have specified in the past
for minibuffer arguments, so you can conveniently use the same text
again.  @xref{Minibuffer History}.

@item Minor Mode
A minor mode is an optional feature of af which can be switched on
or off independently of all other features.  Some minor modes have a
command to turn it on or off.  @xref{Minor Modes}.

@item Mode Line
The mode line is the line at the bottom of each window (q.v.@:), giving
status information on the buffer displayed in that window.  @xref{Mode
Line}.

@item Modified Buffer
A buffer (q.v.@:) is modified if its contents have been changed since
the last time the buffer was saved (or since when it was created, if it
has never been saved).  @xref{Saving}.

@item Moving Messages
Moving messages means erasing them from one place and inserting them in
another.  The usual way to move messages is by killing (q.v.@:) and then
yanking (q.v.@:).  @xref{Killing}.

@item Narrowing
Narrowing means creating a restriction (q.v.@:) that limits the display
of message in the current buffer to only some of the messages in the
buffer.  Messages which are not displayed are inaccessible to the user
until the buffer is widened again, but it is still there, and saving the
folder saves it all.  @xref{Narrowing}.

@item Numeric Argument
A numeric argument is a number, specified before a command, to change
the effect of the command.  Often the numeric argument serves as a
repeat count.  @xref{Arguments}.

@item Point
Point is the place in the buffer at which most commands take effect.
Point is considered to be between two messages, not at one message.  A
cursor (q.v.@:) indicates the location of point.  @xref{Basics,Point}.
	
@item Prefix Argument
See `numeric argument'.

@item Prefix Key
A prefix key is a key sequence (q.v.@:) whose sole function is to
introduce a set of longer key sequences.  @kbd{C-x} is an example of
prefix key; any two-character sequence starting with @kbd{C-x} is
therefore a legitimate key sequence.  @xref{Keys}.

@item Prompt
A prompt is text printed to ask the user for input.  Displaying a prompt
is called prompting.  Af prompts always appear in the echo area
(q.v.@:).  One kind of prompting happens when the minibuffer is used to
read an argument (@pxref{Minibuffer}); the echoing which happens when
you pause in the middle of typing a multi-character key sequence is also
a kind of prompting (@pxref{Echo Area}).

@item Quitting
Quitting means cancelling a partially typed command or a running command,
using @kbd{C-g}.  @xref{Quitting}.

@item Quoting
Quoting means depriving a character of its usual special significance.
In af this is usually done with @kbd{C-q}.  What constitutes special
significance depends on the context and on convention.  For example, in
the minibuffer, an ``ordinary'' character as an af command inserts
itself; so in this context, a special character is any character that
does not normally insert itself (such as @key{DEL}, for example), and
quoting it makes it insert itself as if it were not special.  Not all
contexts allow quoting.  @xref{Minibuffer}.

@item Quoting a Message
When replying to a message, quoting is copying the text of the original
message into the text of the new message, prefixed with some characters
to mark it as the text to which you are replying.  @xref{Sending Mail}.

@item Read-Only Buffer
A read-only buffer is one whose contents you are not allowed to change.
Normally af makes buffers read-only when the folder they are visiting
is write-protected.  @xref{Buffers}.

@item Redisplay
Redisplay is the process of correcting the image on the screen to
correspond to changes that have been made in the text being edited.
@xref{Screen}.

@item Regex
See `regular expression'.

@item Region
The region is the text between point (q.v.@:) and the mark (q.v.@:).
Many commands operate on the region.  @xref{Mark and Region}.

@item Regular Expression
A regular expression is a pattern that can match various text strings;
for example, @samp{l[0-9]+} matches @samp{l} followed by one or more
digits.  @xref{Regex Syntax}.

@item Repeat Count
See `numeric argument'.

@item @key{RET}
@key{RET} is a character that is used to terminate most arguments read
in the minibuffer (q.v.@:).  @xref{User Input,Minibuffer}.

@item Saving
Saving a buffer means copying its contents back into the file that was
visited (q.v.@:) in that buffer.  This is the way in which folders
actually get changed by af.  @xref{Saving}.

@item Scrolling
Scrolling means shifting the messages (or text in typeout) in the window
so as to see a different part of the buffer.  @xref{Scrolling}.

@item Searching
Searching means moving point to the next match for a specified regular
expression.  @xref{Searching}.

@item Search Path
A search path is a list of directory names, to be used for searching for
files for certain purposes.  For example, the variable @code{load-path}
holds a search path for finding afl library files.  @xref{Afl}.

@item Selecting
Selecting a buffer means making it the current (q.v.@:) buffer.
@xref{Buffers,Selecting}.

@item Self-Documentation
Self-documentation is the feature of af which can tell you what any
command does, or give you a list of all commands related to a topic you
specify.  You ask for self-documentation with the @kbd{C-h}.
@xref{Help}.

@item Signature File
A file which is automatically appended to the text of any messages you
send.  @xref{Signatures}.

@item System Tags
Tags (q.v.@:) which are automatically set by af to show status
information about a message.  @xref{Tags}.

@item Tags
Tags are markers which are set on a message either by af (See `system
tags') or a user.  Af allows you to perform commands on messages which
meet specified criteria for tags.  @xref{Tags}.

@item Tagset
The set of messages which match a tag expression.  @xref{Tag Expressions}.

@item Top Level
Top level is the normal state of af, in which you are looking at the
contents of the folder you have visited.  You are at top level whenever
you are not in typeout (q.v.@:) or the minibuffer (q.v.@:), and not in
the middle of a command.  You can get back to top level by quitting
(q.v.@:).  @xref{Quitting}.

@item Typeout
Typeout is the mode used for paging text or messages inside af.  The
typeout window pops up when it is needed, and disappears when typeout
is complete.  @xref{Typeout}.

@item Variable
A variable is an object that can store an arbitrary value.  Af has some
variables (called ``configuration variables) that exist just so that you
can set their values to control the behaviour of af.  @xref{Variables}.

@item Visiting
Visiting a folder means reading its contents into a buffer (q.v.@:)
where they can be processed.  @xref{Visiting}.

@item Whitespace
Whitespace is any run of consecutive formatting characters (space,
tab, newline, and backspace).

@item Widening
Widening is removing any restriction (q.v.@:) on the current buffer;
it is the opposite of narrowing (q.v.@:).  @xref{Narrowing}.

@item Window
Af divides the screen into one or more windows, each of which can
display the contents of one buffer (q.v.@:) at any time.  @xref{Screen},
for basic information on how af uses the screen.  @xref{Windows}, for
commands to control the use of windows.

@item Yanking
Yanking means reinserting messages or text previously killed.  It can be
used to undo a mistaken kill, or for copying or moving messages.  Some
other systems call this ``pasting''.  @xref{Yanking}.
@end table

@c Now we include the indexes
@node Key Index, Command Index, Glossary, Top
@unnumbered Key (Character) Index
@printindex ky

@node Command Index, Variable Index, Key Index, Top
@unnumbered Command and Function Index
@printindex fn

@node Variable Index, Concept Index, Command Index, Top
@unnumbered Variable Index
@printindex vr

@node Concept Index,  ,Variable Index, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@c $Id: glossary.texi,v 1.2 1996/08/28 17:26:01 malc Exp $
