.\" X-BASED RUBIK'S CUBE(tm)
.\"
.\" xrubik.man
.\"
.\" ##
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1994 - 97	David Albert Bagley
.\"
.\"                   All Rights Reserved
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and
.\" its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted,
.\" provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and
.\" that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
.\" supporting documentation, and that the name of the author not be
.\" used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
.\" software without specific, written prior permission.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be "playable",
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.TH XRUBIK 6 "01 January 1997" "V5.4"
.SH NAME
xrubik \- Magic cube X widgets
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /usr/games/xrubik
[-geometry [{width}][x{height}][{+-}{xoff}[{+-}{yoff}]]]
[-display [{host}]:[{vs}]] [-mono]
[-{foreground|fg} <color>] [-{background|bg} <color>]
[-{border|bd} <color>] [-face{0|1|2|3|4|5} <color>]
[-size <int>] [-[no]orient] [-[no]practice]
[-username {string}]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
The original puzzle has 9 squares per face (size = 3).  The puzzle was
designed by Erno Rubik and called the Rubik's Cube.  This has
8!*12!*3^8*2^12/12 or 4.3 * 10^19 different combinations.
.sp
The Pocket Cube has 4 squares per face (size = 2) also designed by Erno
Rubik.  This has 7!*3^6 or 3,674,160 different combinations.
.sp
Rubik's Revenge has 16 squares per face (size = 4) also designed by Erno
Rubik.  This has 7!*3^6*24!*24!/(4!)^6 or 7.4 * 10^46 different
combinations.
.sp
5x5x5 Cube.  This has 8!*12!*3^7*2^10*(24!)^3/(4!)^12 or 2.83 * 10^74
different combinations.
.sp
There is also the Magic Domino 3x3x2 cube which has (8!)^2/4 or
406,425,600 combinations.  The puzzle contained here does not have the
flexibility to allow this.
.sp
A physical 6x6x6 cube is possible but to my knowledge no one has been too
successful in building one.  7x7x7 is also possible, but here one must make
the center most cubes smaller than the outside cubes, so the corners do not
fall off when turned.
.SH FEATURES
.LP
Press "\fBmouse-left\fP" button to move a piece.  Release
"\fBmouse-left\fP" button on a piece on the same face and in the same row.
The pieces will then turn towards where the mouse button was released.
.LP
Press "\fBmouse-center\fP", or press "\fBP\fP" or "\fBp\fP" keys to toggle
the practice mode (in practice mode the record should say "practice").
One must double click on "\fBmouse-center\fP" if the puzzle is being worked
on.  This is good for learning moves and experimenting.
.LP
Click "\fBmouse-right\fP", or press "\fBR\fP" or "\fBr\fP" keys to randomize
(this must be done first to set a new record).  One must double click on
"\fBmouse-right\fP" if the puzzle is being worked on.
.LP
Press "\fBI\fP" or "\fBi\fP" keys to increase the number of "cubies".
.LP
Press "\fBD\fP" or "\fBd\fP" keys to decrease the number of "cubies".
.LP
Press "\fBO\fP" or "\fBo\fP" keys to toggle the orient mode.  One has to
orient the faces in orient mode, besides getting all the faces to be the
same color.  To do this one has to get the lines to be oriented in the
same direction, this only matters with center "cubies", if at all (i.e.
those "cubies" not on a corner or edge).  This does add complexity so
there are 2 sets of records.
.LP
"\fBS\fP" or "\fBs\fP" to start auto-solver.  Only works on 1x1x1, 2x2x2,
and 3x3x3 cubes (3x3x3 cube in non-orient mode).
.LP
Press "\fBU\fP" or "\fBu\fP" keys to undo move.
.LP
Press "\fBG\fP" or "\fBg\fP" keys to get a saved puzzle.
.LP
Press "\fBW\fP" or "\fBw\fP" keys to write or save a puzzle.
.LP
Press "\fBQ\fP", "\fBq\fP", or "\fBCTRL-C\fP" keys to kill program.
.LP
Use the key pad, "R" keys, or arrow keys to move without mouse clicks.
.br
Key pad is defined for the Rubik2d as:
.br
  /     Counterclockwise
.sp
  8     Up
.br
  ^
.br
4<5>6   Left, Clockwise, Right
.br
  v
.br
  2     Down
.sp
Key pad for Rubik3d, use must use your intuition (is this a cop out or
what?).  The key pad is defined differently depending on which side of the
cube your mouse is pointing at.  One thing that stays the same is "5" is
Clockwise and "/" is Counterclockwise.
.LP
Use the control key and the left mouse button, keypad, or arrow keys to
move the whole cube.  This is not recorded as a turn.
.LP
The title is in the following format (non-motif version):
.RS
xrubik{2|3}d<dimension>: {1|2|3|4|5|6<cubes per edge>} @ (<Number of
moves>/{<Record number of moves> <username>|"NEVER noaccess"|"practice"}) -
<Comment>
.RE
If there is no record of the current puzzle, it displays "NEVER noaccess".
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B \-geometry {+|\-}\fIX\fP{+|\-}\fIY\fP
This option sets the initial position of the rubik window (resource
name "\fIgeometry\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-display \fIhost\fP:\fIdpy\fP
This option specifies the X server to contact.
.TP 8
.B \-mono
This option allows you to access the mono mode on a color monitor
(resource name "\fImono\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-{foreground|fg} \fIcolor\fP
This option specifies the foreground of the rubik window (resource name
"\fIforeground\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-{background|bg} \fIcolor\fP
This option specifies the background of the rubik window (resource name
"\fIbackground\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-{border|bd} \fIcolor\fP
This option specifies the border color of the "cubies" in the rubik
window (resource name "\fIborderColor\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-face{0|1|2|3|4|5} <\fIcolor\fP>
This option allows you to change the color of a face (resource name
"\fIfaceColorN\fP"). In mono-mode, color is represented as the first letter
of the color name. On the 2-D version, the faces are ordered top to bottom
and left to right on the "t" configuration. The "+-" configuration is
physically consistent with the former, so it is ordered "0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 4".
If you has two colors that begin with the same letter you should have one
in uppercase and one in lowercase to distinguish them in mono-mode. You can
change the colors of the faces to make a stupid cube (i.e. all White or in
mono-mode all "W"). Unfortunately, it will not normally say its solved when
its randomized. This would be cheating.
.TP 8
.B \-size <\fIint\fP>
This option allows you to change the number of "cubies" on a edge
(resource name "\fIsize\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-[no]orient
This option allows you to access the orient mode (resource name
"\fIorient\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-[no]practice
This option allows you to access the practice mode (resource name
"\fIpractice\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-username \fIstring\fP
This option specifies the user name for any records made or else it will
get your login name (resource name "\fIuserName\fP").
.SH SAVE FORMAT
The format is not standard.  The reason is that this is simple to produce
and the standard notation is no good for variable number of "cubies".
.sp
Rubik2d with default colors, not randomized:
.br
  0       R     Red
.br
1 2 3   Y W G   Yellow, White, Green
.br
  4       O     Orange
.br
  5       B     Blue
.sp
.RS
size: 1-6 <the number of cubes per row>
.br
orient: 0-1 <0 false, 1 true; if 1 then lines on "cubies" to be oriented>
.br
practice: 0-1 <0 false, 1 true>
.br
moves: 0-MAXINT <total number of moves>
.sp
startingPosition: <2 dimensional array of face and cubie position, each
face has size * size "cubies", if orient mode then orientation number
follows face number: 0 up, 1 right, 2 down, and 3 left>
.RE
.sp
This is then followed by the moves, starting from 1.
.RS
move #: <face> <position> <direction> <control>
.RE
Each turn is with respect to a face and position.
.br
Position is 0 to size * size - 1.  Position 0 is in the upper left.
.br
Direction is represented as 0 up, 1 right, 2 down, 3 left, 5 clockwise, and
7 counterclockwise.
.br
Control is represented as 0 or 1, 1 if the whole cube is moved at once
(here position does not matter), 0 if not.  The xrubik record keeper does
not count a control move as a move, but here we do.
.sp
Caution: the program may crash on corrupted input.
.sp
If you have a Rubik's cube you can not solve (2x2x2 or 3x3x3) enter it in
rubik.data file.  Have size = 2 or 3, orient = 0, practice = 0,
randomized = 1, and moves = 0 and the number representation for the color
of the "cubie" faces (usually 0=R, 1=Y, 2=W, 3=G, 4=O, 5=B).  Bring up
xrubik, hit 'g' so it will get your configuration and then 's' to solve
your cube and then 'w' to write out the steps.  Then examine your
rubik.data file.
.SH REFERENCES
Inside Rubik's Cube and Beyond by Christoph Bandelow, Birkhauser,
1982. pp 44, 45, 88, 89
.sp
Magic Cubes 1996 Catalog of Dr. Christoph Bandelow.
.sp
Rubik's Cube Newsletter by Ideal Aug 1982 Vol.1 No. 2
.sp
Rubik's Cube The Solution by Ideal
.sp
Rubik's Revenge Puzzle The Solution by Ideal
.SH SEE ALSO
.LP
X(1), xskewb(6), xdino(6), xpyraminx(6), xoct(6), xmball(6),
xmlink(6), xpanex(6), xcubes(6), xtriangles(6), xhexagons(6), xabacus(1)
.SH COPYRIGHTS
.LP
\*R Copyright 1994-97, David Albert Bagley
.SH BUG REPORTS AND PROGRAM UPDATES
.LP
Send bugs (or their reports, or fixes) to the author
.RS
David Albert Bagley,	<\fIbagleyd@bigfoot.com\fP>
.RE
.LP
The most updated source could be found on \fIftp.x.org\fP under
\fI/contrib/games/puzzles\fP.
