.\" Copyright 1992, Phillip Street and John F. Haugh II
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and create derivative works for any
.\" non-commercial purpose, provided this copyright notice is preserved
.\" in all copies of source code, or included in human readable form
.\" and conspicuously displayed on all copies of object code or
.\" distribution media.
.\"
.\"	@(#)lastlog.8	3.3	08:24:58	29 Sep 1993 (National Guard Release)
.\"	$Id: lastlog.8,v 1.2 1996/09/10 02:45:19 marekm Exp $
.\"
.TH LASTLOG 8
.SH NAME
lastlog \- examine lastlog file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lastlog
.RB [ -u
.IR uid ]
.RB [ -t
.IR days ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlastlog\fR formats and prints the contents of the last login log,
\fI/usr/adm/lastlog\fR.  The \fBlogin-name\fR, \fBport\fR, and \fBlast login 
time\fR will be printed.
The default (no flags) causes lastlog entries to be printed in UID
order.
Entering \fB-u \fIlogin-name\fR flag will
cause the lastlog record for \fIlogin-name\fR only to be printed.
Entering \fB-t \fIdays\fR will cause only the
lastlogins more recent than \fIdays\fR to be printed.
The \fB-t\fR flag overrides the use of \fB-u\fR.
.PP
If the user has never logged in the message \fB"**Never logged in**"\fR will 
be displayed instead of the port and time.
.SH FILES
/usr/adm/lastlog \- lastlog logging file
.SH CAVEATS
Large gaps in uid numbers will cause the lastlog program to run longer with
no output to the screen (i.e. if mmdf=800 and last uid=170, program will
appear to hang as it processes uid 171-799).
