.TH XaoS 6 "20 Oct 1996" "XaoS" "Demos"

.SH NAME
XaoS \- Fast real-time fractal zoomer

.SH SYNOPSIS
xaos [options]

.SH DESCRIPTION

XaoS is a real-time interactive fractal zoomer for X11,
SVGAlib, OS/2, DOS, Plan9 and Macintosh but it can be easily ported to all 
architectures where graphics
library and _GOOD_ optimizing ANSI c compiler (i.e. gcc) is available.
It displays the Mandelbrot set (among other escape time fractals) and 
allows you zoom smoothly into the fractal.  Various coloring modes are 
provided for both the points inside and outside the selected set. In 
addition, switching between Julia and Mandelbrot fractal types and
displaying planes is provided. The first version was a poorly written 
Mandelbrot view by Thomas later modified by Jan to support high frame-rate 
zooming. Other additions were later made including autopilot (for those of 
you without drivers licenses), palette changing, GIF saving, and fractal 
inversion. More informations should be obtained by pressing 'h' in XaoS

.SH "OPTIONS"
XaoS' options should be divided into following parts:
.TP
.B \ Ugly interface options
This options are common for all installations of XaoS because only
interface available for now is ugly interface.
.TP
.B \ Driver selection options
This options lets you choose graphics driver.
.TP
.B \ Driver depended options
This options depends on available drivers. In this manual page are
described just drivers for Unix and Linux.
.SH "SCREEN SIZE OPTIONS"
Knowedge of exact screen size needs XaoS to make random dot stereograms
and choosing good view areas for fractal. This should be done by two ways.
Choosing screen size or choosing pixel size. Screen size is best for fullscreen
drivers where resolution(so pixel size) should be changed. At the other hand
pixel size is best for windowed envireoments where some kind of virtual screen
etc should confuse calculation of pixel size from screen size.
.TP
.B \-screenwidth
exact size of screen in centimeters
.TP
.B \-screenheight
exact size of screen in centimeters
.TP
.B \-pixelwidth
exact size of pixel in centimeters
.TP
.B \-pixelheight
exact size of pixel in centimeters
.SH "FRACTAL FORMULA OPTIONS"
Following options let you specify with fractal formula will be used as
default:
.TP
.B \-mandel
Mandelbrot set fractal(default)
.TP
.B \-mandel3
Mandelbrot set power 3 fractal
.TP
.B \-mandel4
Mandelbrot set power 4 fractal
.TP
.B \-mandel5
Mandelbrot set power 5 fractal
.TP
.B \-mandel6
Mandelbrot set power 6 fractal
.TP
.B \-octo
Octal fractal
.TP
.B \-newton
Newton fractal
.TP
.B \-barnsley
Barnsley fractal
.TP
.B \-phoenix
Start with Phoenix fractal
.TP
.B \-magnet
Start with Magnet fractal
.SH "FRACTAL OPTIONS"
Using following options you may specify various fractal parameters
.TP
.B \-iter
Select number of iterations
.TP
.B \-incoloring
Select incoloring mode(use same number as in interactive menu)
.TP
.B \-outcoloring
Select outcoloring mode(use same number as in interactive menu)
.TP
.B \-plane
Select plane(use same number as in interactive menu)
.TP
.B \-fastdrawing
Select fast drawing mode(use same number as in interactive menu)
.TP
.B \-guessing
Select solid guessing range(use same number as in interactive menu)
.SH "UGLY INTERFACE OPTIONS"
Using following options you may control default ugly interface setting
.TP
.B \-autopilot
Enable autopilot
.TP
.B \-speed
Zooming speed (default is 1)
.TP
.B \-config
Display configuration options and exit.

.SH "DRIVER SELECTION OPTIONS"
Every xaos installation has some graphics driver. This depends on
used operating system, available libraries and configuration. XaoS
by default tries to enable best available driver. So it for example
in Linux case it tests drivers in following order:
.br
SVGAlib
.br
X11
.br
curses
.br
Following options are used to control this operation:
.TP
.B \-driver    
This options lets you specify driver to use and avoid autodection.
.TP
.B \-list
List available drivers and then exit.

.SH "SVGALIB DRIVER OPTIONS"
This driver is available just for Linux/Intel and maybe Linux/alpha platforms. It lets XaoS
to work full-screen. It looks much better that small X11 window, because
XaoS can choose resolution. At the other hand it requires root privileges.
If you want to start XaoS as normal user you need to login as root first
and than do:
.br
chown root xaos
.br
chmod +s xaos
.br
In case of incorrectly configured SVGAlib (see file /etc/vga/libvga.conf
or /usr/local/lib/libvga.conf) it can crash system. Following options
are available:
.TP
.B \-mode
Select graphics mode(same number as in interactive menu)

.SH "X11 DRIVER OPTIONS"
This driver is available on most Unix platforms. It supports MIT shm
extension but works well (but slower) on X servers without it. 
Requires 8bpp pseudo-color or 16,24,32 bpp true-color visual. Following
options are supported:
.TP
.B \-size
Select size of window (WIDTHxHEIGHT)
.TP
.B \-sync
This fixes troubles with one old HP-UX R4 X server - it did not generated keys and
mouse events while it was displaying. So I added this flag that forces sync before
reading evets. It takes some time to X server to generate events.
.TP
.B \-private
Use private colormap. This works only on pseudocolor displays.
.TP
.B \-usedefault
Use default visual. Normally XaoS tryes to autodetect best available one.
But sometimes it should choose wrong one. So try this in case of problems
.TP
.B \-nomitshm
Disable mitshm extensions. Try this in case you are getting error messages
after startup or resizing XaoS window.

.SH "CURSES DRIVER OPTIONS"
This driver uses text only output so it works on all text terminals
that are curses capable. (most modern one. Like vt100) This is one of 
most powerful drivers. Following options should be used to tune
xaos setting for your terminal:
.TP
.B \-normal
Enable use of normal text
.TP
.B \-nonormal
Disable use of normal text
.TP
.B \-dim
Enable use of dim attribute(half bright)
.TP
.B \-nodim
Disable use of dim attribute(half bright)
.TP
.B \-bold
Enable use of bold attribute(double bright)
.TP
.B \-nobold
Disable use of bold attribute(double bright)
.TP
.B \-boldfont
Enable use of bold attribute(bold font)
.TP
.B \-noboldfont
Disable use of bold attribute(bold font)
.TP
.B \-reverse
Enable use of reversed text
.TP
.B \-noreverse
Disable use of reversed text
.TP
.B \-fontheight  
Set font height(8 or 16)
.SH "BUGS"
Not known for now. See xaos home-page at: http://www.paru.cas.cz/~hubicka/XaoS
for list with solutions.
.SH "AUTHORS"
.B Jan Hubicka (hubicka@paru.cas.cz)
.br
.B smail:
.br
Jan Hubicka
.br
Dukelskych bojovniku 1944
.br
Tabor
.br
39003
.br
Czech Republic
.br
.br
.B Thomas Marsh (tmarsh@austion.ibm.com)
.br
See README for full credits
