.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de)
.\" Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" Traduzione in italiano di Giovanni Bortolozzo <borto@dei.unipd.it>
.\" Agosto 1996
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\" 
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:06:03 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" "
.TH GROUP 5 "29 Dicembre 1992" "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NOME
group \- file dei gruppi utenti
.SH DESCRIZIONE
\fB/etc/group\fP è un file ASCII che definisce i gruppi ai quali 
appartengono gli utenti. C'è una voce per riga, ed ogni riga ha
il seguente formato:
.sp
.RS
group_name:passwd:GID:user_list
.RE
.sp
Il significato dei campi è il seguente:
.IP group_name
il nome del gruppo.
.IP password
la password (criptata) del gruppo. Se questo campo è vuoto, non è
necessaria alcuna password.
.IP GID
l'identificativo numerico del gruppo (GID = Group IDentifier).
.IP user_list
tutti i nomi utente dei membri del gruppo, separati da virgole.
.SH FILE
/etc/group
.SH "VEDERE ANCHE"
.BR login "(1), " newgrp "(1), " passwd (5)
