@node What goes in this manual
@chapter What goes in this manual
@cindex Guile
@cindex GNU Extension Language
@cindex user versus programmer's manual

You might be wondering why there are two separate manuals for Guile.

@cindex documentation
@cindex user manual
@cindex reference manual
@cindex tutorial
It is customary to split the documentation for major packages into a
@emph{user manual} (a gentle and introductory document) and a
@emph{reference manual}.  Sometimes people go a step farther and make a
separate @emph{tutorial}; other times the tutorial is part of the user
manual.

In this framekwork, what you are supposed to do is: use the user manual
until you have understood all that it has to offer you, and then use the
reference manual for the rest of your life (except when you are
teaching).

This @strong{Guile Programmer's Manual} is indeed a @emph{reference
manual}, so I assume that you know everything that's in the
@strong{Guile User Manual}, and you are using this manual to look up the
exact detailed specification of what a procedure does, or what a
variable means.


@menu
* What does NOT go in this manual::  
* Other notes::                 
@end menu

@node What does NOT go in this manual
@section What does NOT go in this manual

You will find that this Programmer's Manual is mostly filled with
detailed reference on what each procedure that Guile adds to Scheme.
More precisely: in a reductionist view, Guile could be viewed as a sum
of its parts:
@cindex extensions to standard Scheme
@cindex extensions to R4RS
@cindex Scheme extensions
@example
guile   =       standard Scheme (R4RS)
        PLUS    extensions to R4RS offered by SCM
        PLUS    some extra primitives offered by Guile
        PLUS    portable Scheme library (SLIB)
        PLUS    embeddable Scheme interpreter library (libguile)
        PLUS    high level interface to libguile (gh)
        PLUS    Tk toolkit
        PLUS    threads
        PLUS    Posix library (goonix)
        PLUS    OpenGL library (mesa)
        PLUS    OpenGL toolkit (glut)
        PLUS    Regular expression library (rx)
        PLUS    Applet formalism
        PLUS    Tcl library
@end example

So a complete reference on Guile would have to describe the tools given
to the programmer by @emph{each of these aspects of Guile!}

@cindex exclusions form manual
Fortunately many of these things have already been documented elsewhere,
so we will skip them; some (like Tk) are described elsewhere, but there
are language-related subtelties when they are used with Guile, so we
document Tk here.

We will completely leave out the documentation of standard Scheme, SLIB,
mesa, glut and Tcl.

@cindex bibliography
@cindex references
The bibliography in the Programmer's Manual is the same as that in the
User manual (@pxref{Where to find more Guile/Scheme resources}).

@node Other notes
@section Other notes

Other notes.
