\input texinfo
@setfilename playref.info
@settitle Xconq Players Quick Reference

@finalout
@setchapternewpage off
@iftex
@raggedbottom
@global@parindent=0pt
@end iftex

@titlepage
@title Xconq Players Quick Reference
@subtitle January 1996
@author Stanley T. Shebs

@iftex
@headings off
@everyheading  @| @thistitle @| @thispage
@everyfooting Version 7.1.0 @| April 1996 @| (printed @today{})
@end iftex

@chapter Commands

@section Generic Commands

@clear FULL

@include commands.texi

@section X11 Interface Commands

@table @code

@item @code{ v }
(@code{flash}).  Flicker or animate the position of the current unit.

@item @code{ @{ }
(@code{z-in}) Zoom in (the cells appear larger).

@item @code{ @} }
(@code{z-out}) Zoom out (the cells appear smaller).

@end table

@table @code

@item @code{close}
Close a map window.

@item @code{map}
Open a new map window.

@item @code{rv}
Switch to reverse video.

@item @code{world-map}
Open a world map window.
This is like @code{map}, but the map is scaled to show the whole world
at once.

@item @code{mono}
Switch to monochrome display.
This is really meant for debugging only,
and is only available if debugging was compiled in.

@end table

@section curses Interface Commands

@table @code

@item @code{ _ }
(@code{set-info-lines}) Set list filter.

@item @code{ v }
@code{list-view} Set list view.

@item @code{ > }
@code{grow} Grow the map.

@item @code{ < }
@code{shrink} Shrink the map.

@end table

@table @code

@item @code{both}
Use both chars.

@end table

@section Mac Interface Commands

@table @code

@item
@code{C-[} @code{escape} Escape character.

@end table

@chapter Unit Properties

@table @asis

@item acp
Action points.

@item hp
Hit points.

@item cp
Completeness points.

@item supply
Supply amounts (one for each material type).

@item tp
Tooling points (one for each unit type).

@end table

@chapter Cell Properties

@table @asis

@item terrain
Main terrain type,
border and connection in each direction for each border or connection type,
and thickness of coating for each coating type.

@item elevation
Elevation.

@item people
People's side.

@item materials
Materials in terrain, for each material type.

@item temperature
Ambient temperature.

@item wind
Direction and force of wind.

@item clouds
Density, height and bottom elevation of clouds.

@item feature
Name of geographical feature.

@end table

@bye
