@node Contributors
@unnumbered Contributors to GNU Pascal
@cindex contributors

GNU Pascal is the work of Jukka Virtanen.  Several people have 
contributed to GNU Pascal.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Peter Gerwinski wrote the Borland Pascal (and other) extensions to GPC.

@item
Jan-Jaap van der Heijden ported GPC to various platforms and wrote the
auto-configuration scripts.

@c Please add your name and/or correct the praises. -- PG, 5. Aug. 1996

@c -- JJ 13jul96: should we keep all these ?
@c I already zapped a number of irrelevant ones.
@c
@c Keep them, but with a note that we are talking about GNU C now.
@c (I zapped another one who contributed to C++ front-end.)
@c (Or: ask the FSF.) -- PG, 2. Aug 1996

@end itemize

GNU Pascal is based on GNU CC by Richard Stallman.  Several people have
contributed to GNU CC.

@itemize @bullet
@item
The idea of using RTL and some of the optimization ideas came from the
program PO written at the University of Arizona by Jack Davidson and
Christopher Fraser.  See ``Register Allocation and Exhaustive Peephole
Optimization'', Software Practice and Experience 14 (9), Sept. 1984,
857-866.

@item
Paul Rubin wrote most of the preprocessor.

@item
Leonard Tower wrote parts of the parser, RTL generator, and RTL
definitions, and of the Vax machine description.

@item
Ted Lemon wrote parts of the RTL reader and printer.

@item
Jim Wilson implemented loop strength reduction and some other
loop optimizations.

@item
Nobuyuki Hikichi of Software Research Associates, Tokyo, contributed
the support for the Sony NEWS machine.

@item
Charles LaBrec contributed the support for the Integrated Solutions
68020 system.

@item
Michael Tiemann of Cygnus Support wrote the support for inline functions
and instruction scheduling.  Also the descriptions of the
National Semiconductor 32000 series cpu, the SPARC cpu and part of the
Motorola 88000 cpu.

@item
Jan Stein of the Chalmers Computer Society provided support for
Genix, as well as part of the 32000 machine description.

@item
Randy Smith finished the Sun FPA support.

@item
Robert Brown implemented the support for Encore 32000 systems.

@item
David Kashtan of SRI adapted GNU CC to VMS.

@item
Alex Crain provided changes for the 3b1.

@item
Greg Satz and Chris Hanson assisted in making GNU CC work on HP-UX for
the 9000 series 300.

@item
William Schelter did most of the work on the Intel 80386 support.

@item
Christopher Smith did the port for Convex machines.

@item
Paul Petersen wrote the machine description for the Alliant FX/8.

@item
Dario Dariol contributed the four varieties of sample programs
that print a copy of their source.

@item
Alain Lichnewsky ported GNU CC to the Mips cpu.

@item
Devon Bowen, Dale Wiles and Kevin Zachmann ported GNU CC to the Tahoe.

@item
Jonathan Stone wrote the machine description for the Pyramid computer.

@item
Gary Miller ported GNU CC to Charles River Data Systems machines.

@item
Richard Kenner of the New York University Ultracomputer Research
Laboratory wrote the machine descriptions for the AMD 29000, the DEC
Alpha, the IBM RT PC, and the IBM RS/6000 as well as the support for
instruction attributes.  He also made changes to better support RISC
processors including changes to common subexpression elimination,
strength reduction, function calling sequence handling, and condition
code support, in addition to generalizing the code for frame pointer
elimination.

@item
Richard Kenner and Michael Tiemann jointly developed reorg.c, the delay
slot scheduler.

@item
Mike Meissner and Tom Wood of Data General finished the port to the
Motorola 88000.

@item 
Masanobu Yuhara of Fujitsu Laboratories implemented the machine
description for the Tron architecture (specifically, the Gmicro).

@item
James van Artsdalen wrote the code that makes efficient use of
the Intel 80387 register stack.

@item
Mike Meissner at the Open Software Foundation finished the port to the
MIPS cpu, including adding ECOFF debug support, and worked on the
Intel port for the Intel 80386 cpu.

@item
Ron Guilmette implemented the @code{protoize} and @code{unprotoize}
tools, the support for Dwarf symbolic debugging information, and much of
the support for System V Release 4.  He has also worked heavily on the
Intel 386 and 860 support.

@item
Torbjorn Granlund implemented multiply- and divide-by-constant
optimization, improved long long support, and improved leaf function
register allocation.

@item
Mike Stump implemented the support for Elxsi 64 bit CPU.

@item
John Wehle added the machine description for the Western Electric 32000
processor used in several 3b series machines (no relation to the
National Semiconductor 32000 processor).

@end itemize

