@node PVS
@chapter A list of failed Pascal Validation Suite Conformance tests by

		GPC-1.2 (GCC-2.7.2)

Last modified: Sun Dec 10 00:58:14 1995
Run by: Juki <jtv@@hut.fi>

Number of validation suite tests run: 199
Only LEVEL-0 tests run (no conformant arrays).

All programs have been named as @code{p@var{DDD}.pas} (@var{DDD} = three digits)
Otherwise my naming convention does not mean anything.

All tests run with and without @code{-g} and with/without @code{-O} 
and with/without @code{-O6} Only the tests that fail are mentioned, 
otherwise they all pass.

@example
	TEST	WHAT HAPPENS
	----    ------------
i486	Mach 3 (CMU UX): 	All conformance tests pass.

rs-6000 Aix 3.2.5: 		All conformance tests pass.

mips	Ultrix 4.3:		All conformance tests pass.
				*** Tested with gpc 2.5.7 only

alpha:	OSF 1/V3.2c:		All conformace tests pass.

	Important: DO NOT USE -O switch with the alpha GPC
		   until the problems are fixed!!!

	*** With -O the following FAIL
	*** This is ridiculous!!! They worked before...
	p004	FAIL
	p029	FAIL
	p069	FAIL
	p072	FAIL
	p075	FAIL
	p076	FAIL
	p098	FAIL
	p108	FAIL
	p110	FAIL
	p111	FAIL
	p113	FAIL
	p128	FAIL
	p136	FAIL
	p142	runtime error
	p157	FAIL
	p164	FAIL
	p167	FAIL
	p171	FAIL

	*** But with -O6 the following are compiled incorrectly.
	*** (i.e. they compile but produce incorrect results).
	*** Don't use -O6 on alpha until the bugs are fixed.
	*** These have never worked.
	*** I have not checked the reason for these:
	p029	FAIL
	p095	FAIL
	p110	FAIL
	p111	FAIL
	p117	Loops
	p157	FAIL

sparc	Solaris 2.3:		*** Tested with gpc 2.6.3 only
	003	Signal 11 received by the compiler when -O (optimized)

HP-PA:	HP-UX 9.03 / --with-gnu-as
	All other tests pass, except 003:

	003	Compiler: Unrecognized insn. Compiler abort().
		(PASS with -O6)

		p003.pas:262: internal error--unrecognizable insn:
		(jump_insn 730 728 732 (set (pc)
		        (if_then_else (gt (const_int 0)
		                (reg:SI 259))
		            (label_ref 766)
		            (pc))) -1 (nil)
		    (nil))
		p003.pas:262: internal gcc abort
		p003.pas did not compile

		This looks more like a generic GNU compiler bug than
		a bug in GPC code...

		003 is the PVS test 6.1.1-3.
@end example
