                XTrojka - Trojka for the X Window  System
                 Copyright (c) 1994,1995,1996 Maarten Los
				--------

SEE ALSO THE COPYRIGHT NOTICE INCLUDED IN THE TROJKA CORE DOC


THIS SOFTWARE IS FREE FOR _NON-COMMERCIAL_ DISTRIBUTION
XTrojka is free software. Permission to copy, use, and distribute this
software and its doc is granted, as long as you don't change the
copyright notice in any of the parts of the package.   You are allowed
to make modifications in the source code, _only_ to fit it to your
system's needs as long as you keep the appearance and the copyright
notices intact. You are not allowed to redistribute modified versions of
XTrojka.


COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION
As of release 1.2, you are not allowed to distribute XTrojka or parts
of it on a commercial software distribution without the permission of
the author. Commercial distributions include highly profit-oriented
software publications. Publications where money is charged only to
cover some basic expenses (generally the costs of the distribution
media and some overhead) are not considered commercial and may include
this program IN IT'S FULL VERSION ONLY on their distribution.


DISCLAIMER
This software comes 'as is'. I take no warranty for crashing systems,
messed up directories, angry bosses or the Spanish Inquisition. I also
don't take warranty for any damage directly or indirectly caused to
hardware, software or people by playing, trying to play, running,
installing, patching, viewing, compiling, disassembling, debugging,
copying, moving or deleting the software. In other words, whatever
happens, I didn't do it.

