.\" (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 21:42:42 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Traducido al castellano (con permiso) por:
.\" Sebastian Desimone (chipy@argenet.com.ar) (desimone@fasta.edu.ar)
.TH ASSERT 3  "Diciembre 19, 1995" "GNU" "Manual del Programador de Linux"
.SH NOMBRE
assert \- aborta el programa si la aserción es falsa.
.SH SINOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <assert.h>
.sp
.BI "void assert (int " "expression" ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPCION
.B assert()
imprime un mensaje de error a la salida estandar y termina el programa
llamando a 
.B abort()
si
.B expression
es falsa (p.e., compara igual a cero).  Esto solo sucede cuando la macro
.B NDEBUG
está sin definir.
.SH "VALOR RETORNADO"
Ningún valor es retornado.
.SH "CONFORME A"
ANSI - C
.SH "BUGS"
.B assert()
es implementada como un macro; si la expresión testeada tiene efectos
laterales, el comportamiento del programa puede ser diferente dependiendo
donde
.B NDEBUG
está definida. Esto puede crear Heisenbugs que se van cuando la depuración
está activada.
.SH "VER TAMBIEN"
.BR exit "(3), " abort (3)
