.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 21:29:05 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Traducido al castellano (con permiso) por:
.\" Sebastian Desimone (chipy@argenet.com.ar) (desimone@fasta.edu.ar)
.TH BYTEORDER 3  "Diciembre 23, 1995" "BSD" "Manual del Programador de Linux"
.SH NOMBRE
htonl, htons, ntohl, ntohs \- convierten valores entre el host byte order
y el network byte order
.SH SINOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <netinet/in.h>
.sp
.BI "unsigned long int htonl(unsigned long int " hostlong );
.sp
.BI "unsigned short int htons(unsigned short int " hostshort );
.sp
.BI "unsigned long int ntohl(unsigned long int " netlong );
.sp
.BI "unsigned short int ntohs(unsigned short int " netshort );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPCION
La función \fBhtonl()\fP convierte el entero largo \fIhostlong\fP
desde el host byte order a network byte order.
.PP
La función \fBhtons()\fP convierte el entero corto \fIhostshort\fP
desde host byte order a network byte order.
.PP
La función \fBntohl()\fP convierte el entero largo \fInetlong\fP
desde network byte order a host byte order.
.PP
La función \fBntohs()\fP convierte el entero  corto \fInetshort\fP
desde network byte order a host byte order.
.PP
En los i80x86 el host byte order es el primer Byte Menos Significativo, 
mientras que el network byte order, como es usado en Internet, es el primer
Byte Más Significativo.
.SH "CONFORME A"
BSD 4.3
.SH "VER TAMBIEN"
.BR gethostbyname "(3), " getservent (3)
