.\" Copyright 1993 Mitchum DSouza <m.dsouza@mrc-applied-psychology.cambridge.ac.uk>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\"
.\" Traducido al castellano (con permiso) por:
.\" Sebastian Desimone (chipy@argenet.com.ar) (desimone@fasta.edu.ar)
.TH CATGETS 3 "Diciembre 25, 1995"
.SH NOMBRE
catgets \- obtiene un mensaje de un catálogo
.SH SINOPSIS
.LP
.nf
.ft B
#include <features.h>
.br
#include <nl_types.h>
.ft
.fi
.LP
.nf
.ft B
char *catgets(catalog, set_number, message_number, message)
nl_catd catalog;
int set_number;
int message_number;
char *message;
.ft
.fi
.SH DESCRIPCION
.IX "catgets" "" "\fLcatgets\fR \(em read a program message" ""
.LP
.B catgets(\|)
lee el mensaje
.IR message_number ,
asignado en
.IR set_number ,
del catálogo de mensajes identificado por
.IR catalog .
.I catalog
es un descriptor de catálogo retornado por una llamada anterior a
.BR catopen (3).
El cuarto argumento
.I message
apunta al mensaje por defecto que puede ser retornado por
.B catgets(\|)
si el catálogo de mensajes identificado no está actualmente abierto, o está
dañado. El mensaje de texto está contenido en un acumulador (buffer) interno
y debe ser copiado a la aplicación si este será salvado o modificado. La 
cadena de retorno es siempre terminada con un byte NULL.
.SH VALOR RETORNADOS
.LP
Si es exitosa,
.B catgets(\|)
retorna un puntero a un acumulador (buffer) interno conteniendo la cadena
del mensaje terminada en NULL.  
.B catgets(\|)
retorna un puntero a
.I message
si este falla porque el catálogo de mensajes especificado por
.I catalog
no está abierto. De otra manera,
.B catgets(\|)
retorna un puntero a una cadena vacía si el catálogo de mensajes está
disponible pero no contiene el mensaje especificado.
.SH NOTAS
Estas funciones son solo disponibles en libc.so.4.4.4c (o superior).
.SH VER TAMBIEN
.BR catopen (3),
.BR setlocale (3)
