.\" (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 21:27:01 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Traducido al castellano (con permiso) por:
.\" Sebastian Desimone (chipy@argenet.com.ar) (desimone@fasta.edu.ar)
.TH CLOCK 3  "Diciembre 25, 1995" "GNU" "Manual del Programador de Linux"
.SH NOMBRE
clock \- Determina el tiempo del procesador
.SH SINOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <time.h>
.sp
.B clock_t clock(void);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPCION
La función 
.B clock()
retorna una aproximación del tiempo de procesador usado por el programa.
.SH "VALOR RETORNADO"
El valor retornado es el tiempo de CPU hasta que
.BR clock_t 
obtiene el el número de segundos usado, dividido por
.BR CLOCKS_PER_SEC .
.SH "CONFORMS A"
ANSI C
.SH "BUGS"
El C estandar permite para valores arbitrarios al comienzo del programa; tomar
la diferencia entre el valor retornado por una llamada a 
.B clock()
al comienzo y el final del programa para obtener máxima portabilidad.
.PP
La llamada a la función 
.B times()
retorna más información.
.SH "VER TAMBIEN"
.BR times (2)
