.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:40:39 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Traducido al castellano (con permiso) por:
.\" Sebastian Desimone (chipy@argenet.com.ar) (desimone@fasta.edu.ar)
.TH ECVT 3  "Enero 21, 1995" "" "Manual del Programador de Linux"
.SH NOMBRE
ecvt, fcvt \- convierte un número de punto flotante a una cadena.
.SH SINOPSIS
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.sp
.BI "char *ecvt(double " number ", size_t " ndigits ", int *" decpt ,
.BI "int *" sign );
.sp
.BI "char *fcvt(double " number ", size_t " ndigits ", int *" decpt ,
.BI "int *" sign );
.SH DESCRIPCION
La función \fBecvt()\fP convierte \fInumber\fP a una cadena terminada en
NULL de \fIndigits\fP dígitos, y retorna un puntero a la cadena.
La cadena en si no contiene un punto decimal; sin embargo, la posición
del punto decimal relativa al comienzo de la cadena es guardada en
\fIdecpt\fP.  Un valor negativo para \fIdecpt\fP significa que el punto
decimal está a la izquierda del comienzo de la cadena. Si el signo de 
\fInumber\fP es negativo, \fIsign\fP es asignado a un valor distinto de
cero, de otro modo a este le es asignado un 0. 
.PP
La función \fBfcvt()\fP es identica a \fBecvt()\fP, excepto que
\fIndigits\fP especifica el número de dígitos luego del punto decinal.
.SH "VALOR RETORNADO"
Ambas, las funciones \fBecvt()\fP y \fBfcvt()\fP retornan un puntero a 
una cadena estática conteniendo la representación ASCII de \fInumber\fP.
La cadena estática es sobreescrita por cada llamada a \fBecvt()\fP o
\fBfcvt()\fP.
.SH "VER TAMBIEN"
.BR gcvt "(3), " sprintf (3)
