.\" =()<.ds a @<NEWSARTS>@>()=
.ds a /var/news
.\" =()<.ds b @<NEWSBIN>@>()=
.ds b /usr/libexec/news
.\" =()<.ds c @<NEWSCTL>@>()=
.ds c /etc/news
.\" indentation start
.de Is
.in +0.5i
..
.\" indentation end
.de Ie
.in -0.5i
..
.\" example start
.de Es
.LP
.nf
.ft B
.Is
..
.\" example end
.de Ee
.Ie
.ft R
.fi
.LP
..
.TH NEWSDB 5 "18 Nov 1994"
.BY "C News"
.SH NAME
newsdb \- USENET network news database: article tree, history, active, active.times
.SH DESCRIPTION
Each news article is stored in a separate file
with one or more links,
each a numeric name
in a directory under
.B \*a
corresponding to a newsgroup
the article is (cross-)posted to.
For example,
an article posted to
.B comp.unix.wizards
might be stored in
.BR \*a/comp/unix/wizards/4867 .
.PP
The file
.B \*c/active
defines the locally-valid news groups
and
contains one line per group.
Each line consists of four blank-separated fields:
newsgroup name,
highest local article number assigned,
lowest local article number in use (approximately),
and
a flag.
Both article-number fields are at least five digits wide.
(Some older news software may expect exactly five digits.)
The current flag values are
.B y
(a normal unmoderated group),
.B n
(like
.B y
but local postings disallowed),
.B m
(a normal moderated group),
.B x
(a locally-disabled group,
no articles will be filed here),
and
.B =
(followed by the real group
under which to file articles in this group;
articles are treated exactly as if their
.B Newsgroups:
header specified the real group instead of the original one;
highest and lowest fields are ignored).
.PP
The file
.B \*c/active.times
is an extension of the
.I active
file that records the arrival of new newsgroups by time and creator.
When a new newsgroup is created,
the group name,
time of group creation
(as seconds since January 1, 1970,
00:00, GMT),
and mail address of the creator
are appended as a single line.
The file must always be sorted in increasing order
of the creation-time field.
The news software only appends to the file,
which normally suffices to ensure this.
An initial
.I active.times
for already existing newsgroups,
with all times equal to the time of its creation
and all creators ``unknown'',
can be built using
.I act.to.times
(see
.IR newsmaint (8CN)).
.I Active.times
provides a quick
way for newsreaders to tell when new groups have arrived,
without weird heuristics and expensive schemes
like storing old lists of
newsgroups and comparing them to the
.I active
file.
.PP
The file
.B \*c/history
contains one line for each article received.
Each line consists of three tab-separated fields:
a
.IR Message-ID: ,
a complex middle field,
and
the list of links to this article.
The links are separated by blanks and are given as pathnames relative to
.IR \*a ,
except that all the `/'s except the last one (between the
last component of the newsgroup name and the numeric article name)
are replaced by `.'s.
If an article has been expired or cancelled without being seen first,
the list of links and the tab before it are omitted.
.PP
The middle
.I history
field potentially has several subfields separated by tilde (~).
Currently only three are defined:
the arrival date, the expiry date,
and an optional article size in bytes.
The arrival date is a
.I time_t
(see
.IR time (2);
in Unix a
.I time_t
is a count of seconds since the GMT beginning of 1970)
expressed as a decimal integer.
The expiry date is another decimal
.IR time_t ,
or the contents of the
.B Expires:
header from the message,
or `-' indicating that there was no explicit expiry date given.
.PP
There are also index files to permit rapid
.I history
lookup by message-id,
typically called
.B \*c/history.dir
and
.BR \*c/history.pag .
.PP
Also usually present now are
.I overview
files, one per newsgroup;
see
.IR newsoverview (5)
for more detail on them.
.SH EXAMPLES
A trivial
.I active
file.
.Es
control 0000600006 600004 y
junk 0000000076 00074 y
comp.org.usrgroup 0000000006 00004 y
talk.bizarre 0000296123 292136 n
comp.sys.sun 0000050175 50173 m
list.sun-spots 0000000076 00076 =comp.sys.sun
comp.os.vms 0000000000 00000 x
.Ee
.PP
A trivial
.I history
file.
.Es
<3451@hcr.UUCP>	581905588~-	comp.text/1317 comp.sources.wanted/4200
<9383@alice.UUCP>	611934511~-
.Ee
.SH FILES
.nf
.BI \*a/ news/group/1234
.B \*c/active
.B \*c/active.times
.B \*c/history
.B \*c/history.dir
.B \*c/history.pag
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
dbz(1),
readnews(1CN),
rn(1),
dbz(3Z),
getabsdate(3),
news(5),
newsoverview(5),
newssys(5),
expire(8CN),
newshist(8CN),
newsmaint(8CN),
relaynews(8CN),
.IR newsinvaders (9.1)
.SH HISTORY
.I Active.times
invented
by Mark Moraes and Geoff Collyer
as part of the C News project.
.SH BUGS
Reader implementors are warned that the
various files mentioned here\(emthe
.I active
file,
the
.I history
file,
the article tree itself,
and the overview files\(emin general are not updated perfectly simultaneously.
Nor are they necessarily updated in a predictable order.
