.\" =()<.ds a @<NEWSARTS>@>()=
.ds a /var/news
.\" =()<.ds b @<NEWSBIN>@>()=
.ds b /usr/libexec/news
.\" =()<.ds c @<NEWSCTL>@>()=
.ds c /etc/news
.TH REPORT 8CN "22 Aug 1994"
.BY "C News"
.SH NAME
report \- report news problems and status
.SH SYNOPSIS
\&...
.B |
.B \*b/report
[
.B \-u
] subject
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Report
is used to report the problems and status of the news system,
normally by mail.
The
.I subject
is a single argument (normally enclosed in quotes) summarizing what
the message is about;
the message text itself is supplied to
.I report
on standard input.
If the message text is empty,
.I report
does not send anything.
.PP
The
.B \-u
option indicates that the message is urgent,
which may affect how it
is mailed or to whom.
.PP
.I Report
consults a control file,
.IR \*c/report.ctl ,
to determine the destination(s) of mail.
The control file is syntactically a shell file,
which should assign to the shell variables
.I urgentto
and
.IR nonurgentto .
The values should be one or more mailing addresses,
in whatever form the local mailer wants,
separated by commas (and possibly white space as well).
They should not contain material other than addresses,
e.g. RFC822 comments containing full names etc.
.PP
.I Report
is supplied as a central handling facility for error messages and
status reports for C News,
so that changes and customization
in this often-system-specific area
can be done in a single program.
.SH FILES
\*c/report.ctl
.SH SEE ALSO
mail(1)
.SH HISTORY
Written by Henry Spencer for the C News project.
.SH BUGS
There is too much stupid and unnecessary diversity
among mailer user interfaces for a single
implementation of
.I report
to be entirely satisfactory.
In particular, the incantation to send a message which is already
equipped with some of its RFC822 headers
is
.I very
system-specific.
.PP
The don't-send-empty-messages business is perhaps inelegant,
but it turns out to be very convenient.
