.\"{{{}}}
.\"{{{  Title
.TH HALT,REBOOT 8 "Februari 02, 1997" "" "Linux System Administrator's Manual"
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Name
.SH NAME
halt, reboot \- stop the system.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Synopsis
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /sbin/halt
.RB [ \-n ]
.RB [ \-w ]
.RB [ \-d ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-i ]
.br
.B /sbin/reboot
.RB [ \-n ]
.RB [ \-w ]
.RB [ \-d ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-i ]
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Description
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBHalt\fP notes that the system is being brought down in the file
\fB/var/log/wtmp\fP, and then either tells the kernel to halt or
reboot the system. If \fIhalt\fP or \fIreboot\fP is called when the system is
\fInot\fP in runlevel \fB0\fP or \fB6\fP, \fIshutdown(8)\fP will be
invoked instead (with the flag \fB-h\fP or \fB-r\fP).
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Options
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \fB\-n\fP
Don't sync before reboot or halt.
.IP \fB\-w\fP
Don't actually reboot or halt but only write the wtmp record
(in the \fB/var/log/wtmp\fP file).
.IP \fB\-d\fP
Don't write the wtmp record. The \fB\-n\fP flag implies \fB\-d\fP.
.IP \fB\-f\fP
Force halt or reboot, don't call shutdown.
.IP \fB\-i\fP
Shut down all network interfaces just before halt or reboot.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Diagnostics
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If you're not the superuser, you will get the message `must be superuser'.
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Notes
.SH NOTES
Under previous \fBsysvinit\fP releases, \fIreboot\fP and \fIhalt\fP should
never be called directly. From this release on \fIhalt\fP and \fIreboot\fP
invoke \fIshutdown\fP if the system is in runlevel 1-5.
.PP
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  Author
.SH AUTHOR
Miquel van Smoorenburg, miquels@cistron.nl
.\"}}}
.\"{{{  See also
.SH "SEE ALSO"
shutdown(8), init(1).
.\"}}}
