.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 1992 Drew Eckhardt;
.\"                               1993 Michael Haardt, Ian Jackson.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Wed Jul 21 23:02:38 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Translated Jun 27 1996 Miguel A. Sepulveda (angel@vivaldi.princeton.edu)
.TH _EXIT 2 "27 June 1996" "Linux" "Manual del Programador"
.SH NOMBRE 
_exit \- finaliza el proceso en marcha 
.SH SINOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "void _exit(int " status );
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
.B _exit
termina el proceso llamado immediatamente. Cualquiera de los descriptores
de ficheros pertenecientes a dicho proceso se cierran; además cualquier
descendiente del proceso es heredado por el proceso 1, init,
y se envia la señal 
.B SIGCHLD
al ascendiente del proceso.

Se envia
.I status
al ascendiente del proceso como estado de salida,
y puede recogerse usando uno de los miembros de la familia de
llamadas  
.B wait
.SH "VALOR REGRESADO"
.B _exit
nunca regresa ningún valor..
.SH "CONFORMA CON"
SVID, AT&T, POSIX, X/OPEN, BSD 4.3
.SH NOTAS
.B _exit
no llama ninguna función registrada con la función ANSI C
.B atexit
y no limpia las reservas (buffers) de I/O estandard. 
Para hacer esto use
.BR exit (3).
.SH "VEASE"
.BR fork "(2), " execve "(2), " waitpid "(2), " wait4 "(2), " kill "(2), "
.BR wait "(3), " exit "(3) "
