.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt
.\" (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de),
.\" Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Thu Jul 22 14:00:08 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Tue Aug 10 1993 by Alan Cox (iiitac@pyramid.swansea.ac.uk)
.\" Translated 15 Dec 1995 Miguel A. Sepulveda (miguel@typhoon.harvard.edu)
.\" Modified 25 Jun 1996 by  Miguel A. Sepulveda(angel@vivaldi.princeton.edu)
.TH ACCT 2 "25 Junio 1996" "Linux 0.99.11" "Manual del Programador"
.SH NOMBRE
acct \- interruptor para activar/desactivar la contabilidad de procesos
.SH SINOPSIS
.ad l
.nf
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int acct(const char *" filename );
.fi
.ad b
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
.BR PRECAUCIÓN:
Puesto que esta función no está implementada (Linux 0.99.11),
siempre regresa \-1 y asigna a 
.I errno
el valor
.BR ENOSYS .
Si acctkit está instalado la función ejecuta 'según anunciado'.

Cuando se usa con el nombre de un fichero existente como argumento,
la contabilidad se activa, registros para cada proceso finalizado
se añade a
\fIfilename\fP.  Usando \fBNULL\fP como argumento desactiva la 
contabilidad.
.SH "VALOR REGRESADO"
En caso de éxito el valor regresado es cero. Si hay algún error,
el resultado es  \-1 y 
.I errno
se asigna apropiadamente.
.SH NOTAS
No se genera contabilidad alguna para programas ejecutando cuando
ocurre una caida del sistema. En particular, procesos que nunca finalizan
no se tienen en cuenta en la contabilidad.
.SH "VÉASE"
.BR acct (5)
