.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 1992 Drew Eckhardt;
.\"                               1993 Michael Haardt, Ian Jackson.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Wed Jul 21 19:42:57 1993, Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Translated 15 Dec 1995 Miguel A. Sepulveda (miguel@typhoon.harvard.edu)
.\" Modified 30 June 1996 Miguel A. Sepulveda (angel@vivaldi.princeton.edu)
.TH ALARM 2 "30 Junio 1996" Linux "Manual del Programador"
.SH NOMBRE
alarm \- activa un despertador para el envio de una señal
.SH SINOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "long alarm(long " sec );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
.BR alarm " se encarga de enviar una señal "  SIGALRM
al proceso en                           
.I sec
segundos.

Si
.I sec
es cero, no se prepara una nueva 
.B alarm

En toda circunstancia cualquier 
.B alarm
previamente preparada se cancela.
.SH "VALOR REGRESADO"
.B alarm
regresa el número de segundos restantes en cualquier despertador
previamente activado, o cero si no hubiese ninguna alarma pendiente.  
.SH NOTAS
.BR alarm " y  " setitimer
comparten el mismo cronómetro; 
llamadas a una interferirán con el uso de la otra.

Retardos en el procesamiento (scheduling delays) 
puede, como siempre, ocasionar el retardo de la
ejecución del proceso por una cantidad de tiempo arbitraria.
.SH "CONFORMA CON"
SVID, AT&T, POSIX, X/OPEN, BSD 4.3
.SH "VÉASE"
.BR setitimer "(2), " signal "(2), " sigaction "(2), "
.BR gettimeofday "(2), " select "(2), " pause "(2), " sleep "(3) "
 