.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Portions extracted from /usr/include/sys/socket.h, which does not have
.\" any authorship information in it.  It is probably available under the GPL.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\"
.\" Other portions are from the 6.9 (Berkeley) 3/10/91 man page:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"     This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"     California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" Translated 15 Dec 1995 Miguel A. Sepulveda (miguel@typhoon.harvard.edu)
.\" Modified 30 Junio 1996 Miguel A. Sepulveda (angel@vivaldi.princeton.edu)
.TH BIND 2 "30 Juniuo 1996" "Linux 0.99.11" "Manual del Programador"
.SH NOMBRE
bind \- enlaza un nombre a un zócalo (socket)
.SH SINOPSIS
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.sp
.BI "int bind(int " sockfd ", struct sockaddr *" my_addr ", int " addrlen );
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
.B bind
da al zócalo
.IR sockfd ,
la dirección local
.IR my_addr .
.I my_addr
tiene una longitud de
.I addrlen
bytes.  Tradicionalmente, esto se conoce como "asignar un nombre a un
zócalo"
(cuando un interruptor se crea con
.BR socket (2),
existe en un espacio de nombres (familia de direcciones) pero carece 
de nombre).
.SH NOTAS
Enlazando un nombre en el dominio UNIX crea un zócalo en el sistema
de ficheros que debe ser borrado por el invocador cuando ya no
es necesario (usando
.BR unlink (2)).

Las reglas usadas en el enlace de nombre varia según el dominio de
comunicacion.  Consultese las entradas en la sección 4 para más
información detallada.
.SH "VALOR REGRESADO"
Cero es el resultado en caso de éxito. En caso de error, \-1 es
el valor regresado y a
.I errno
se  le asigna un valor apropiado.
.SH ERRORES
.TP 0.8i
.B EBADF
.I sockfd
no es un descriptor válido.
.TP
.B EINVAL
El zócalo ya está enlazado a una dirección. Esto puede cambiar en el  
futuro: vease
.I linux/unix/sock.c
para más detalles.
.TP
.B EACCES
La dirección está protegida, y el usuario no es el superusuario.
.PP
Los siguientes errores son específicos a los zócalos del dominio
UNIX (AF_UNIX):
.TP 0.8i
.B EINVAL
La dirección
.I addr_len
es incorrecta, o el zócalo no pertenecia a la familia
.B AF_UNIX.
.TP
.B EROFS
El nodo-i (inode) del zócalo reside
en un sistema de ficheros de solo-lectura.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I my_addr
señala fuera de su espacio de direcciones accesible.
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I my_addr
es demasiado larga.
.TP
.B ENOENT
El fichero no existe.    
.TP
.B ENOMEM
No hay suficiente memoria en el kernel disponible.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
Un componente en el prefijo del camino (path) no es un directorio.
.TP
.B EACCES
El permiso de búsqueda ha sido denegado en uno de los componentes
del camino.
.TP
.B ELOOP
.I my_addr
contiene una referencia circular (i.e., via una ligadura simbólica).
.SH HISTORIA
La función 
.B bind
apareció en BSD 4.2.
.SH "VÉASE"
.BR accept "(2), " connect "(2), " listen "(2), "
.BR socket "(2), " getsockname (2)
