.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt
.\" (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de),
.\" Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Wed Jul 21 19:52:58 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Sun Aug 21 17:40:38 1994 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Translated 15 Dec 1995 Miguel A. Sepulveda (miguel@typhoon.harvard.edu)
.\" Modified 30 Jun 1996 Miguel A. Sepulveda (angel@vivaldi.princeton.edu)
.TH BRK 2 "30 Junio 1996" "Linux 0.99.11" "Manual del Programador"
.SH NOMBRE
brk, sbrk \- cambia el tamaño del segmento de datos
.SH SINOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int brk(void *" end_data_segment );
.br
.BI "void *sbrk(ptrdiff_t" increment );
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
.B brk
asigna el final del segmento de dato al valor especificado por
.IR end_data_segment .
.I end_data_segment
debe ser mayor que el final del segmento de texto y debe estar 16Kb
antes del final de la pila (stack).
.sp
.B sbrk aumenta el espacio de datos del programa por
.I increment
bytes.
.B sbrk
no es una llamada del sistema, es simplemente un empaquetador (wrapper)
C.
.SH "VALOR REGRESADO"
En caso de éxito,
.B brk
vuelve cero, y    
.B sbrk
dá un puntero al principio de una nueva area. En caso de error la función
regresa \-1, y 
.I errno
es asignado el valor
.BR ENOMEM .
.SH "CONFORMA CON"
BSD 4.3

.BR brk " and " sbrk
no están definidos en el estándard C y están excluidos deliberadamente del
estándard POSIX.1 (veanse los párrafos B.1.1.1.3 
y B.8.3.3).
.SH "VÉASE"
.BR execve "(2), " getrlimit "(2), " malloc "(3), " end (3)

