.\" Written by Ralf Baechle (ralf@waldorf-gmbh.de),
.\" Copyright (c) 1994, 1995 Waldorf GMBH
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\" Translated 25 Dec 1995 Miguel A. Sepulveda (miguel@typhoon.harvard.edu)
.\" Modified  30 June 19966 Miguel A. Sepulveda (angel@vivaldi.princeton.edu)
.TH CACHEFLUSH 2 "30 Junio 1996" "Linux" "Llamadas del Sistema"
.SH NOMBRE
cacheflush \- limpia los contenidos de instrucciones y/o datos en reserva 
(cache)
.SH SINOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <asm/cachectl.h>
.sp
.BI "int cacheflush(char *" addr ", int "nbytes ", int "cache ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
.B cacheflush
limpia los contenidos de la(s) reserva(s) indicada(s) por las direcciones
del usuario en el rango addr a (addr+nbytes-1). "cache" puede ser uno de los
siguientes:
.TP
.B ICACHE
Purga las instrucciones en reserva.
.TP
.B DCACHE
Escribe en memoria e invalida las líneas en reserva afectadas.
.TP
.B BCACHE
Lo mismo que
.B (ICACHE|DCACHE).
.PP
.SH "VALOR REGRESADO"
.B cacheflush
regresa 0 en éxito o \-1 en caso de error. El valor de la variable
errno indica el tipo de error.
.SH ERRORES
.TP
.B EINVAL
El parámetro cache no es ninguno de los valores aceptados,
ICACHE, DCACHE, o BCACHE.
.TP
.B EFAULT
Alguna o todas las direcciones en el rango addr a (addr+nbytes-1) no
es accesible.
.PP
.SH BUGS
La implementación presente ignora los parametros addr y nbytes. Por lo
tanto toda la reserva se purga tras la ejecutación del comando.
.SH NOTA
Esta llamada del sistema sólo está disponible para sistemas basados en
MIPS.

.SH "VEASE"
.BR cachectl "(2)"
