.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de)
.\" Modified Wed Jul 21 22:10:52 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 15 April 1995 by Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com):
.\"   Added 'fchdir'.
.\"   Fix bugs in error section.
.\" Translated 18 Dec 1995 Miguel A. Sepulveda (miguel@typhoon.harvard.edu)
.\" Modified 30 June 1996 Miguel A. Sepulveda (angel@vivaldi.princeton.edu)
.TH CHDIR 2 "18 Diciembre 1995" "Linux 1.2.4" "Manual del Programador"
.SH NOMBRE
chdir, fchdir \- cambia el directorio de trabajo
.SH SINOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int chdir(const char *" path );
.br
.BI "int fchdir(int " fd ");"
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
.B chdir
cambia el directorio presente a aquel especificado en 
.IR path .
.PP
.B fchdir
es lo mismo que
.BR chdir ,
solo que el directorio está dado como un descriptor de un fichero abierto.
.SH "VALOR REGRESADO"
En caso de éxito, cero. Si hay algún error, \-1, y finalmente 
.I errno
es asignado un valor apropiado.
.SH ERRORES
Según el sistema de ficheros, otros errores pueden regresar. Los errores
más comunes están listados a continuación:

.TP 0.8i
.B EPERM
El proceso no tiene permiso de ejecución en el directorio.    
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I path
indica fuera de su espacio de direcciones accesible.
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I path
es demasiado largo.
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
no es un descriptor de fichero válido.
.TP
.B ENOENT
El fichero no existe.   
.TP
.B ENOMEM
No hay suficiente memoria disponible en el kernel.  
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
Un componente del camino (path) no es un directorio.
.TP
.B EACCES
Permiso de inspección ha sido denegado en uno de los componentes
del camino.
.TP
.B ELOOP
.I path
contiene una referencia circular (por exemplo, a través de una ligadura
simbólica)
.SH "VÉASE"
.BR getcwd "(3), " chroot (2)
