.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Portions extracted from /usr/include/sys/socket.h, which does not have
.\" any authorship information in it.  It is probably available under the GPL.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\"
.\" Other portions are from the 6.9 (Berkeley) 3/10/91 man page:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"     This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"     California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" Translated 1 Jul 1996 miguel A. Sepulveda (angel@vivaldi.princeton.edu)
.TH CONNECT 2 "1 Julio 1996" "Linux 0.99.11" "Manual del Programador"
.SH NOMBRE
connect \- inicia una conexión en un zócalo (socket)
.SH SINOPSIS 
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.sp
.BI "int connect(int " sockfd ", struct sockaddr *" serv_addr ", int
.BI " addrlen );
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
El parámetro 
.I sockfd
es un descriptor.
Si es del tipo  
.BR SOCK_DGRAM ,
esta llamada especifica el interlocutor (peer) con el que el  zócalo
va a ser asociado; esta dirección es a la que se van a enviar datagramas,
y la única dirección del que se van a recibir datagramas. Si el  zócalo
es del tipo
.B SOCK_STREAM ,
esta llamada intenta hacer una conexión a otro  zócalo. El otro  zócalo
está especificado por 
.BR serv_addr ,
el cual es una dirección en el espacio de comunicaciones del  zócalo.
Cada espacio de comunicaciones interpreta el parámetro 
.BR serv_addr ,
a su manera. Generalmente,  zócalos de corriente (stream sockets)
pueden conectarse mediante  
.B connect
una vez solamente;  zócalos de datagramas pueden usar
.B connect
varias veces para cambiar sus asociaciones. Los  zócaloes de datagramas
pueden disolver la asociación conectando a una dirección inválida, tal como
una dirección nula.
.SH "VALOR REGRESADO"
Si la conexión o enlace tiene éxito, se regresa 0. En caso de   
error \-1, y la variable
.I errno
se asigna apropiadamente.
.SH ERRORES
Vease las fuentes del Kernel Linux por más detalles.
.SH HISTORIA
La llamada        
.B connect
apareció por primera vez en BSD 4.2.
.SH "VÉASE"
.BR accept "(2), " bind "(2), " listen "(2), "
.BR socket "(2), " getsockname (2)
