.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" Translated 25 December Miguel A. Sepulveda (miguel@typhoon.harvard.edu)
.\" Modified 1 Jul 1996 Miguel A. Sepulveda (angel@vivaldi.princeton.edu)
.TH FLOCK 2 "1 Julio 1996" "Linux 0.99.11" "Manual del Programador"
.SH NOMBRE 
flock \- impone o elimina un candado de recomendación 
(advisory lock) en un fichero abierto.
.SH SINOPSIS
.B #include <sys/file.h>
.sp
.BR "int flock(int " fd ", int " operation )
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
Impone o elimina un candado de recomendación  en un fichero abierto.
El fichero está especificado por
.IR fd .
Las operaciones válidas son:     
.RS
.sp
.TP 1.0i
LOCK_SH
Shared lock (candado compartido).  Más de un proceso puede tener un
candado compartido para un fichero en un momento dado.
.TP
LOCK_EX
Exclusive lock (candado exclusivo).  Solamente un proceso puede tener un    
candado exclusivo para un fichero en un momento dado.
.TP
LOCK_UN
Unlock.
.TP
LOCK_NB
No bloquear cuando se encadene (locking).  Puede especificarse  (mediante
la operación 
.I or
) 
junto con otra de las operaciones.       
.sp
.RE

Un fichero no puede tener simultaneamente candados compartido y exclusivo.

Un fichero está encadenado  (p.e., el nodo-i)
.I no
el descriptor de fichero. Por tanto,
.BR dup (2)
y  
.BR fork (2)
no crean múltiples casos de un candado.    
.SH "VALOR REGRESADO"
En caso de éxito, cero, En caso de error \-1 , y  
.I errno
es asignado apropiadamente.
.SH ERRORES
.TP
.B EWOULDBLOCK
El fichero está encadenado  y la bandera
.B LOCK_NB
ha sido elejida.   
.SH NOTAS
En linux,    
.B flock
está implementado como una llamada a
.BR fcntl .
Por favor vease
.BR fcntl (2)
para más detalles sobre errores.
.SH "VÉASE"
.BR open "(2), " close "(2), " dup "(2), " execve "(2), " fcntl "(2), "
.BR fork "(2), "
