.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" Translated 8 Jan 1996 Miguel A. Sepulveda (miguel@typhoon.harvard.edu)
.\" Modified 1 Jul 1996 Miguel A. Sepulveda (angel@vivaldi.princeton.edu)
.TH GETDOMAINNAME 2 "1 Julio 1996" "Linux 0.99.11" "Manual del Programador"
.SH NOMBRE 
getdomainname, setdomainname \- obtiene/asigna el nombre del dominio
(domain name) 
.SH SINOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int getdomainname(char *" name ", size_t " len );
.br
.BI "int setdomainname(const char *" name ", size_t " len );
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
Estas funciones se usan para acceder o cambiar el nombre de dominio del
proceso presente. 
.SH "VALOR REGRESADO"
En caso de éxito se regresa 0. En caso de error, \-1, y 
.I errno
se asigna apropiadamente.
.SH ERRORES
.TP
.B EINVAL
Para
.BR getdomainname ,
.I name
señala a 
.B NULL
ó
.I name
es más largo que
.IR len .
.TP
.B EPERM
Para
.BR setdomainname ,
el invocador no era superusuario.
.TP
.B EINVAL
Para
.BR setdomainname ,
.I len
era demasiado largo.
.SH "CONFORMA CON"
POSIX no especifica estas llamadas.
.SH BUGS
.B getdomainname
no se ajusta a otras implementaciones, ya que estas siempre regresan 
.I len
bytes, aún en caso de que
.I name
sea más largo. Linux, por otra parte regresa 
.B EINVAL
en dicho caso (hasta las bibliotecas  DLL 4.4.1 ).
.SH NOTAS
En  Linux,
.B getdomainname
está implementada en el ámbito de bibliotecas mediante la llamada
.BR uname (2).
.SH "VÉASE"
.BR gethostname "(2), " sethostname "(2), " uname (2)
