.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Updated with additions from Mitchum DSouza (m.dsouza@mrc-apu.cam.ac.uk)
.\" Portions Copyright 1993 Mitchum DSouza (m.dsouza@mrc-apu.cam.ac.uk)
.\" Translated 10 Jan 1996 Miguel A. Sepulveda (miguel@typhoon.harvard.edu)
.\" Modified 1 Jul 1996 Miguel A. Sepulveda (angel@vivaldi.princeton.edu)
.TH GETHOSTID 2 "1 Julio 1996" "Linux 0.99.13" "Manual del Programador"
.SH NOMBRE
gethostid, sethostid \- obtiene o asigna un identificador único al          
anfitrión (host) presente.
.SH SINOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B long int gethostid(void);
.br
.BR "int sethostid(long int " hostid )
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
Obtiene o asigna un identificador único de 32-bit para para el ordenador
presente. El identificador de 32-bit pretende ser único entre todos los
sistemas UNIX en existencia. Este normalmente asemeja la dirección Internet
para el sistema local, según dado por 
.BR gethostbyname (3),
y por tanto normalmente nunca necesita ser asignado.

El uso de la llamada
.B sethostid
está restringida al superusuario.  

El argumento
.I hostid
está almacenado en el fichero 
.IR /etc/hostid .
.SH "VALORES REGRESADOS" 
.B gethostid
regresa el identificador de 32-bit del anfitrión (host) presente según 
.BR sethostid (2).
.SH "CONFORMA CON"
POSIX.1 no define estas funciones, pero ISO/IEC 9945-1:1990 las menciona
en B.4.4.1.
.SH FICHEROS
.I /etc/hostid
.SH "VEASE"
.BR hostid "(1), " gethostbyname (3)

