addng.o: EXTERN.h
addng.o: INTERN.h
addng.o: addng.c
addng.o: addng.h
addng.o: common.h
addng.o: config.h
addng.o: final.h
addng.o: intrp.h
addng.o: last.h
addng.o: ngdata.h
addng.o: nntp.h
addng.o: nntpclient.h
addng.o: only.h
addng.o: rcstuff.h
addng.o: search.h
addng.o: trn.h
addng.o: util.h
art.o: EXTERN.h
art.o: INTERN.h
art.o: art.c
art.o: art.h
art.o: artio.h
art.o: artstate.h
art.o: backpage.h
art.o: bits.h
art.o: cache.h
art.o: charsubst.h
art.o: common.h
art.o: config.h
art.o: final.h
art.o: head.h
art.o: help.h
art.o: intrp.h
art.o: ng.h
art.o: ngdata.h
art.o: ngstuff.h
art.o: nntp.h
art.o: nntpclient.h
art.o: rcstuff.h
art.o: rt-select.h
art.o: rt-util.h
art.o: rt-wumpus.h
art.o: rthread.h
art.o: search.h
art.o: sw.h
art.o: term.h
art.o: trn.h
art.o: util.h
art.o: util2.h
artio.o: EXTERN.h
artio.o: INTERN.h
artio.o: art.h
artio.o: artio.c
artio.o: artio.h
artio.o: bits.h
artio.o: cache.h
artio.o: common.h
artio.o: config.h
artio.o: final.h
artio.o: head.h
artio.o: ngdata.h
artio.o: nntp.h
artio.o: nntpclient.h
artio.o: rthread.h
artsrch.o: EXTERN.h
artsrch.o: INTERN.h
artsrch.o: artio.h
artsrch.o: artsrch.c
artsrch.o: artsrch.h
artsrch.o: bits.h
artsrch.o: cache.h
artsrch.o: common.h
artsrch.o: config.h
artsrch.o: final.h
artsrch.o: head.h
artsrch.o: intrp.h
artsrch.o: kfile.h
artsrch.o: ng.h
artsrch.o: ngdata.h
artsrch.o: ngstuff.h
artsrch.o: nntp.h
artsrch.o: nntpclient.h
artsrch.o: rt-select.h
artsrch.o: rthread.h
artsrch.o: search.h
artsrch.o: term.h
artsrch.o: util.h
autosub.o: EXTERN.h
autosub.o: INTERN.h
autosub.o: autosub.c
autosub.o: autosub.h
autosub.o: common.h
autosub.o: config.h
autosub.o: final.h
autosub.o: ngsrch.h
autosub.o: search.h
autosub.o: util.h
backpage.o: EXTERN.h
backpage.o: INTERN.h
backpage.o: backpage.c
backpage.o: backpage.h
backpage.o: common.h
backpage.o: config.h
backpage.o: final.h
backpage.o: intrp.h
bits.o: EXTERN.h
bits.o: INTERN.h
bits.o: artio.h
bits.o: bits.c
bits.o: bits.h
bits.o: cache.h
bits.o: common.h
bits.o: config.h
bits.o: final.h
bits.o: head.h
bits.o: intrp.h
bits.o: ndir.h
bits.o: ng.h
bits.o: ngdata.h
bits.o: nntp.h
bits.o: nntpclient.h
bits.o: rcln.h
bits.o: rcstuff.h
bits.o: rt-select.h
bits.o: rt-util.h
bits.o: rthread.h
bits.o: term.h
bits.o: trn.h
bits.o: util.h
bits.o: util2.h
cache.o: EXTERN.h
cache.o: INTERN.h
cache.o: artsrch.h
cache.o: bits.h
cache.o: cache.c
cache.o: cache.h
cache.o: common.h
cache.o: config.h
cache.o: final.h
cache.o: hash.h
cache.o: head.h
cache.o: intrp.h
cache.o: ng.h
cache.o: ngdata.h
cache.o: nntp.h
cache.o: nntpclient.h
cache.o: rcstuff.h
cache.o: rt-ov.h
cache.o: rt-page.h
cache.o: rt-process.h
cache.o: rt-select.h
cache.o: rt-util.h
cache.o: rthread.h
cache.o: search.h
cache.o: term.h
cache.o: trn.h
cache.o: util.h
cache.o: util2.h
charsubst.o: EXTERN.h
charsubst.o: INTERN.h
charsubst.o: artstate.h
charsubst.o: charsubst.c
charsubst.o: charsubst.h
charsubst.o: common.h
charsubst.o: config.h
charsubst.o: search.h
decode.o: EXTERN.h
decode.o: INTERN.h
decode.o: common.h
decode.o: config.h
decode.o: decode.c
decode.o: decode.h
edit_dist.o: EXTERN.h
edit_dist.o: common.h
edit_dist.o: config.h
edit_dist.o: edit_dist.c
edit_dist.o: util.h
final.o: EXTERN.h
final.o: INTERN.h
final.o: artio.h
final.o: bits.h
final.o: cache.h
final.o: common.h
final.o: config.h
final.o: final.c
final.o: final.h
final.o: init.h
final.o: intrp.h
final.o: last.h
final.o: ng.h
final.o: ngdata.h
final.o: nntp.h
final.o: nntpclient.h
final.o: rcstuff.h
final.o: term.h
final.o: util.h
hash.o: EXTERN.h
hash.o: INTERN.h
hash.o: common.h
hash.o: config.h
hash.o: final.h
hash.o: hash.c
hash.o: hash.h
hash.o: util.h
head.o: EXTERN.h
head.o: INTERN.h
head.o: artio.h
head.o: cache.h
head.o: common.h
head.o: config.h
head.o: final.h
head.o: hash.h
head.o: head.c
head.o: head.h
head.o: ng.h
head.o: ngdata.h
head.o: nntp.h
head.o: nntpclient.h
head.o: rt-process.h
head.o: rt-util.h
head.o: rthread.h
head.o: util.h
help.o: EXTERN.h
help.o: INTERN.h
help.o: common.h
help.o: config.h
help.o: help.c
help.o: help.h
help.o: term.h
help.o: trn.h
init.o: EXTERN.h
init.o: INTERN.h
init.o: addng.h
init.o: art.h
init.o: artio.h
init.o: artsrch.h
init.o: backpage.h
init.o: bits.h
init.o: cache.h
init.o: common.h
init.o: config.h
init.o: decode.h
init.o: final.h
init.o: head.h
init.o: help.h
init.o: init.c
init.o: init.h
init.o: intrp.h
init.o: kfile.h
init.o: last.h
init.o: ng.h
init.o: ngdata.h
init.o: ngsrch.h
init.o: ngstuff.h
init.o: nntp.h
init.o: nntpclient.h
init.o: only.h
init.o: rcln.h
init.o: rcstuff.h
init.o: respond.h
init.o: rthread.h
init.o: search.h
init.o: sw.h
init.o: term.h
init.o: trn.h
init.o: util.h
intrp.o: EXTERN.h
intrp.o: INTERN.h
intrp.o: artio.h
intrp.o: artsrch.h
intrp.o: bits.h
intrp.o: cache.h
intrp.o: common.h
intrp.o: config.h
intrp.o: final.h
intrp.o: head.h
intrp.o: init.h
intrp.o: intrp.c
intrp.o: intrp.h
intrp.o: ng.h
intrp.o: ngdata.h
intrp.o: nntp.h
intrp.o: nntpclient.h
intrp.o: rcstuff.h
intrp.o: respond.h
intrp.o: rt-select.h
intrp.o: rt-util.h
intrp.o: rthread.h
intrp.o: search.h
intrp.o: term.h
intrp.o: trn.h
intrp.o: util.h
intrp.o: util2.h
kfile.o: EXTERN.h
kfile.o: INTERN.h
kfile.o: artsrch.h
kfile.o: bits.h
kfile.o: cache.h
kfile.o: common.h
kfile.o: config.h
kfile.o: hash.h
kfile.o: intrp.h
kfile.o: kfile.c
kfile.o: kfile.h
kfile.o: ng.h
kfile.o: ngdata.h
kfile.o: ngstuff.h
kfile.o: rcstuff.h
kfile.o: rt-process.h
kfile.o: rt-select.h
kfile.o: rthread.h
kfile.o: search.h
kfile.o: term.h
kfile.o: trn.h
kfile.o: util.h
last.o: EXTERN.h
last.o: INTERN.h
last.o: common.h
last.o: config.h
last.o: intrp.h
last.o: last.c
last.o: last.h
last.o: trn.h
last.o: util.h
ndir.o: EXTERN.h
ndir.o: INTERN.h
ndir.o: common.h
ndir.o: config.h
ndir.o: ndir.c
ndir.o: ndir.h
ng.o: EXTERN.h
ng.o: INTERN.h
ng.o: art.h
ng.o: artio.h
ng.o: artsrch.h
ng.o: artstate.h
ng.o: backpage.h
ng.o: bits.h
ng.o: cache.h
ng.o: charsubst.h
ng.o: common.h
ng.o: config.h
ng.o: decode.h
ng.o: final.h
ng.o: head.h
ng.o: help.h
ng.o: intrp.h
ng.o: kfile.h
ng.o: last.h
ng.o: ng.c
ng.o: ng.h
ng.o: ngdata.h
ng.o: ngstuff.h
ng.o: nntp.h
ng.o: nntpclient.h
ng.o: rcln.h
ng.o: rcstuff.h
ng.o: respond.h
ng.o: rt-select.h
ng.o: rt-wumpus.h
ng.o: rthread.h
ng.o: search.h
ng.o: sw.h
ng.o: term.h
ng.o: trn.h
ng.o: util.h
ngdata.o: EXTERN.h
ngdata.o: INTERN.h
ngdata.o: bits.h
ngdata.o: cache.h
ngdata.o: common.h
ngdata.o: config.h
ngdata.o: final.h
ngdata.o: head.h
ngdata.o: intrp.h
ngdata.o: kfile.h
ngdata.o: ndir.h
ngdata.o: ng.h
ngdata.o: ngdata.c
ngdata.o: ngdata.h
ngdata.o: nntp.h
ngdata.o: nntpclient.h
ngdata.o: rcln.h
ngdata.o: rcstuff.h
ngdata.o: rt-select.h
ngdata.o: rthread.h
ngdata.o: term.h
ngdata.o: trn.h
ngdata.o: util.h
nghash.o: EXTERN.h
nghash.o: common.h
nghash.o: config.h
nghash.o: final.h
nghash.o: hash.h
nghash.o: intrp.h
nghash.o: ndir.h
nghash.o: ngdata.h
nghash.o: nghash.c
nghash.o: nntp.h
nghash.o: nntpclient.h
nghash.o: rcln.h
nghash.o: rcstuff.h
nghash.o: term.h
nghash.o: trn.h
nghash.o: util.h
ngsrch.o: EXTERN.h
ngsrch.o: INTERN.h
ngsrch.o: common.h
ngsrch.o: config.h
ngsrch.o: final.h
ngsrch.o: ngsrch.c
ngsrch.o: ngsrch.h
ngsrch.o: rcln.h
ngsrch.o: rcstuff.h
ngsrch.o: search.h
ngsrch.o: term.h
ngsrch.o: trn.h
ngsrch.o: util.h
ngstuff.o: EXTERN.h
ngstuff.o: INTERN.h
ngstuff.o: bits.h
ngstuff.o: cache.h
ngstuff.o: common.h
ngstuff.o: config.h
ngstuff.o: decode.h
ngstuff.o: final.h
ngstuff.o: head.h
ngstuff.o: intrp.h
ngstuff.o: kfile.h
ngstuff.o: ng.h
ngstuff.o: ngdata.h
ngstuff.o: ngstuff.c
ngstuff.o: ngstuff.h
ngstuff.o: rcstuff.h
ngstuff.o: respond.h
ngstuff.o: rt-select.h
ngstuff.o: rt-wumpus.h
ngstuff.o: rthread.h
ngstuff.o: sw.h
ngstuff.o: term.h
ngstuff.o: trn.h
ngstuff.o: util.h
ngstuff.o: util2.h
nntp.o: EXTERN.h
nntp.o: artio.h
nntp.o: bits.h
nntp.o: cache.h
nntp.o: common.h
nntp.o: config.h
nntp.o: final.h
nntp.o: head.h
nntp.o: init.h
nntp.o: ngdata.h
nntp.o: nntp.c
nntp.o: nntp.h
nntp.o: nntpclient.h
nntp.o: rcln.h
nntp.o: term.h
nntp.o: trn.h
nntp.o: util.h
nntpauth.o: EXTERN.h
nntpauth.o: INTERN.h
nntpauth.o: common.h
nntpauth.o: config.h
nntpauth.o: nntp.h
nntpauth.o: nntpauth.c
nntpauth.o: nntpauth.h
nntpauth.o: nntpclient.h
nntpauth.o: util2.h
nntpclient.o: EXTERN.h
nntpclient.o: INTERN.h
nntpclient.o: common.h
nntpclient.o: config.h
nntpclient.o: nntpclient.c
nntpclient.o: nntpclient.h
nntpinit.o: EXTERN.h
nntpinit.o: common.h
nntpinit.o: config.h
nntpinit.o: nntpclient.h
nntpinit.o: nntpinit.c
nntplist.o: EXTERN.h
nntplist.o: common.h
nntplist.o: config.h
nntplist.o: nntpclient.h
nntplist.o: nntplist.c
only.o: EXTERN.h
only.o: INTERN.h
only.o: common.h
only.o: config.h
only.o: final.h
only.o: ngsrch.h
only.o: only.c
only.o: only.h
only.o: search.h
only.o: util.h
parsedate.o: config.h
parsedate.o: parsedate.y
rcln.o: EXTERN.h
rcln.o: INTERN.h
rcln.o: common.h
rcln.o: config.h
rcln.o: ngdata.h
rcln.o: rcln.c
rcln.o: rcln.h
rcln.o: rcstuff.h
rcln.o: util.h
rcln.o: util2.h
rcstuff.o: EXTERN.h
rcstuff.o: INTERN.h
rcstuff.o: autosub.h
rcstuff.o: bits.h
rcstuff.o: cache.h
rcstuff.o: common.h
rcstuff.o: config.h
rcstuff.o: final.h
rcstuff.o: hash.h
rcstuff.o: intrp.h
rcstuff.o: ngdata.h
rcstuff.o: nntp.h
rcstuff.o: nntpclient.h
rcstuff.o: only.h
rcstuff.o: rcln.h
rcstuff.o: rcstuff.c
rcstuff.o: rcstuff.h
rcstuff.o: search.h
rcstuff.o: term.h
rcstuff.o: trn.h
rcstuff.o: util.h
respond.o: EXTERN.h
respond.o: INTERN.h
respond.o: artio.h
respond.o: cache.h
respond.o: charsubst.h
respond.o: common.h
respond.o: config.h
respond.o: decode.h
respond.o: final.h
respond.o: head.h
respond.o: intrp.h
respond.o: ng.h
respond.o: ngdata.h
respond.o: nntp.h
respond.o: nntpclient.h
respond.o: respond.c
respond.o: respond.h
respond.o: term.h
respond.o: trn.h
respond.o: util.h
respond.o: util2.h
rt-mt.o: EXTERN.h
rt-mt.o: INTERN.h
rt-mt.o: bits.h
rt-mt.o: cache.h
rt-mt.o: common.h
rt-mt.o: config.h
rt-mt.o: hash.h
rt-mt.o: intrp.h
rt-mt.o: ng.h
rt-mt.o: ngdata.h
rt-mt.o: nntp.h
rt-mt.o: nntpclient.h
rt-mt.o: rcln.h
rt-mt.o: rt-mt.c
rt-mt.o: rt-mt.h
rt-mt.o: rt-process.h
rt-mt.o: rthread.h
rt-mt.o: trn.h
rt-mt.o: util.h
rt-ov.o: EXTERN.h
rt-ov.o: INTERN.h
rt-ov.o: bits.h
rt-ov.o: cache.h
rt-ov.o: common.h
rt-ov.o: config.h
rt-ov.o: final.h
rt-ov.o: hash.h
rt-ov.o: head.h
rt-ov.o: ng.h
rt-ov.o: ngdata.h
rt-ov.o: nntp.h
rt-ov.o: nntpclient.h
rt-ov.o: overview.h
rt-ov.o: rt-ov.c
rt-ov.o: rt-ov.h
rt-ov.o: rt-process.h
rt-ov.o: rt-util.h
rt-ov.o: rthread.h
rt-ov.o: term.h
rt-ov.o: trn.h
rt-ov.o: util.h
rt-page.o: EXTERN.h
rt-page.o: INTERN.h
rt-page.o: cache.h
rt-page.o: common.h
rt-page.o: config.h
rt-page.o: ngdata.h
rt-page.o: rt-page.c
rt-page.o: rt-page.h
rt-page.o: rt-select.h
rt-page.o: rt-util.h
rt-page.o: rthread.h
rt-page.o: term.h
rt-page.o: trn.h
rt-page.o: util.h
rt-process.o: EXTERN.h
rt-process.o: INTERN.h
rt-process.o: bits.h
rt-process.o: cache.h
rt-process.o: common.h
rt-process.o: config.h
rt-process.o: final.h
rt-process.o: hash.h
rt-process.o: intrp.h
rt-process.o: kfile.h
rt-process.o: ng.h
rt-process.o: ngdata.h
rt-process.o: rcln.h
rt-process.o: rt-process.c
rt-process.o: rt-process.h
rt-process.o: rt-select.h
rt-process.o: rthread.h
rt-process.o: trn.h
rt-process.o: util.h
rt-select.o: EXTERN.h
rt-select.o: INTERN.h
rt-select.o: artsrch.h
rt-select.o: bits.h
rt-select.o: cache.h
rt-select.o: common.h
rt-select.o: config.h
rt-select.o: final.h
rt-select.o: help.h
rt-select.o: kfile.h
rt-select.o: ng.h
rt-select.o: ngdata.h
rt-select.o: ngstuff.h
rt-select.o: rt-page.h
rt-select.o: rt-select.c
rt-select.o: rt-select.h
rt-select.o: rt-util.h
rt-select.o: rthread.h
rt-select.o: search.h
rt-select.o: term.h
rt-select.o: trn.h
rt-select.o: util.h
rt-util.o: EXTERN.h
rt-util.o: INTERN.h
rt-util.o: artio.h
rt-util.o: cache.h
rt-util.o: common.h
rt-util.o: config.h
rt-util.o: ngdata.h
rt-util.o: nntp.h
rt-util.o: nntpclient.h
rt-util.o: rt-select.h
rt-util.o: rt-util.c
rt-util.o: rt-util.h
rt-util.o: rthread.h
rt-util.o: term.h
rt-wumpus.o: EXTERN.h
rt-wumpus.o: INTERN.h
rt-wumpus.o: artio.h
rt-wumpus.o: backpage.h
rt-wumpus.o: cache.h
rt-wumpus.o: common.h
rt-wumpus.o: config.h
rt-wumpus.o: final.h
rt-wumpus.o: head.h
rt-wumpus.o: ng.h
rt-wumpus.o: ngdata.h
rt-wumpus.o: rt-select.h
rt-wumpus.o: rt-wumpus.c
rt-wumpus.o: rt-wumpus.h
rt-wumpus.o: rthread.h
rt-wumpus.o: term.h
rt-wumpus.o: util.h
rthread.o: EXTERN.h
rthread.o: INTERN.h
rthread.o: artstate.h
rthread.o: bits.h
rthread.o: cache.h
rthread.o: common.h
rthread.o: config.h
rthread.o: final.h
rthread.o: hash.h
rthread.o: head.h
rthread.o: intrp.h
rthread.o: kfile.h
rthread.o: ng.h
rthread.o: ngdata.h
rthread.o: nntp.h
rthread.o: nntpclient.h
rthread.o: rcln.h
rthread.o: rcstuff.h
rthread.o: rt-mt.h
rthread.o: rt-ov.h
rthread.o: rt-page.h
rthread.o: rt-process.h
rthread.o: rt-select.h
rthread.o: rt-util.h
rthread.o: rt-wumpus.h
rthread.o: rthread.c
rthread.o: rthread.h
rthread.o: search.h
rthread.o: trn.h
rthread.o: util.h
search.o: EXTERN.h
search.o: INTERN.h
search.o: common.h
search.o: config.h
search.o: search.c
search.o: search.h
search.o: util.h
strftime.o: EXTERN.h
strftime.o: common.h
strftime.o: config.h
strftime.o: strftime.c
sw.o: EXTERN.h
sw.o: INTERN.h
sw.o: artstate.h
sw.o: cache.h
sw.o: charsubst.h
sw.o: common.h
sw.o: config.h
sw.o: head.h
sw.o: intrp.h
sw.o: ng.h
sw.o: ngdata.h
sw.o: only.h
sw.o: rt-page.h
sw.o: rt-util.h
sw.o: search.h
sw.o: sw.c
sw.o: sw.h
sw.o: term.h
sw.o: trn.h
sw.o: util.h
sw.o: util2.h
term.o: EXTERN.h
term.o: INTERN.h
term.o: cache.h
term.o: common.h
term.o: config.h
term.o: final.h
term.o: help.h
term.o: intrp.h
term.o: term.c
term.o: term.h
term.o: util.h
term.o: util2.h
test.o: test.c
trn-artchk.o: EXTERN.h
trn-artchk.o: common.h
trn-artchk.o: config.h
trn-artchk.o: nntpclient.h
trn-artchk.o: trn-artchk.c
trn.o: EXTERN.h
trn.o: INTERN.h
trn.o: addng.h
trn.o: cache.h
trn.o: common.h
trn.o: config.h
trn.o: final.h
trn.o: help.h
trn.o: init.h
trn.o: intrp.h
trn.o: kfile.h
trn.o: last.h
trn.o: ng.h
trn.o: ngdata.h
trn.o: ngsrch.h
trn.o: ngstuff.h
trn.o: nntp.h
trn.o: nntpclient.h
trn.o: only.h
trn.o: patchlevel.h
trn.o: rcln.h
trn.o: rcstuff.h
trn.o: search.h
trn.o: sw.h
trn.o: term.h
trn.o: trn.c
trn.o: trn.h
trn.o: util.h
trn.o: util2.h
unipatch.o: unipatch.c
unship.o: EXTERN.h
unship.o: common.h
unship.o: config.h
unship.o: decode.h
unship.o: respond.h
unship.o: unship.c
util.o: EXTERN.h
util.o: INTERN.h
util.o: common.h
util.o: config.h
util.o: final.h
util.o: nntp.h
util.o: nntpauth.h
util.o: nntpclient.h
util.o: term.h
util.o: util.c
util.o: util.h
util2.o: EXTERN.h
util2.o: INTERN.h
util2.o: common.h
util2.o: config.h
util2.o: nntp.h
util2.o: nntpauth.h
util2.o: nntpclient.h
util2.o: util.h
util2.o: util2.c
util2.o: util2.h
uudecode.o: EXTERN.h
uudecode.o: common.h
uudecode.o: config.h
uudecode.o: decode.h
uudecode.o: respond.h
uudecode.o: uudecode.c
Makefile: Makefile.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/Makefile.SH
Pnews: Pnews.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/Pnews.SH
Policy.sh: Policy.sh.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/Policy.sh.SH
Rnmail: Rnmail.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/Rnmail.SH
Speller: Speller.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/Speller.SH
config.h: config.h.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/config.h.SH
filexp: filexp.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/filexp.SH
makedepend: makedepend.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/makedepend.SH
makedir: makedir.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/makedir.SH
mbox.saver: mbox.saver.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/mbox.saver.SH
newsetup: newsetup.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/newsetup.SH
newsgroups: newsgroups.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/newsgroups.SH
newsnews: newsnews.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/newsnews.SH
norm.saver: norm.saver.SH config.sh ; /bin/sh $(srcdir)/norm.saver.SH
# WARNING: Put nothing here or make depend will gobble it up!
