.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Traduzione in italiano di Giovanni Bortolozzo <borto@dei.unipd.it>
.\" Agosto 1996
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)swapon.8	6.3 (Berkeley) 3/16/91
.\"
.\" Sun Dec 27 12:31:30 1992: Modified by faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Sat Mar  6 20:46:02 1993: Modified by faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Sat Oct  9 09:35:30 1993: Converted to man format by faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Sat Nov 27 20:22:42 1993: Updated authorship information, faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Mon Sep 25 14:12:38 1995: Added -v and -p information
.\"
.\" " for hilit19
.TH SWAPON 8 "25 Settembre 1995" "Linux 1.x" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NOME
swapon, swapoff \- abilita/disabilita i dispositivi per la paginazione e 
lo swap
.SH SINTASSI
.B /sbin/swapon [\-h \-V]
.br
.B /sbin/swapon \-a [\-v]
.br
.BI "/sbin/swapon [\-v] [\-p " "priorità" "] " " file_speciale " ...
.br
.B /sbin/swapoff [\-h \-V]
.br
.B /sbin/swapoff \-a
.br
.BI /sbin/swapoff " file_speciale " ...
.SH DESCRIZIONE
.B Swapon
è usato per specificare i device sui quali saranno effettuate la 
paginazione e lo swap.
La chiamata a
.B swapon
di solito avviene nel file di inizializzazione del sistema come multi-utente
.I /etc/rc
rendendo disponibili tutti i device di swap, cosicché le attività di 
paginazione e swap sono possibili su molti device e file.

Normalmente, è usata la prima forma:
.TP
.B \-h
Fornisce un aiuto
.TP
.B \-V
Mostra la versione
.TP
.B \-a
Sono resi disponibili tutti i device marcati come ``sw'' (swap device) nel file
.I /etc/fstab 
.TP
.BI \-p " priorità"
Specifica la priorità per
.BR swapon .
Questa opzione è disponibile solo se
.B swapon
è stato compilato e viene usato su kernel 1.3.2 o successivi.
.PP
.B Swapoff
Disabilita lo swap sui device e file specificati, o in tutte le entry di
swap nel file
.I /etc/fstab
quando è data l'opzione
.BR \-a .
.SH VEDERE ANCHE
.BR swapon "(2), " swapoff "(2), " fstab "(5), " init "(8), " mkswap (8),
.BR rc "(8), " mount (8)
.SH FILE
.I /dev/hd??
device standard di paginazione 
.br
.I /dev/sd??
device standard (SCSI) di paginazione 
.br
.I /etc/fstab
tabella ASCII descrittiva dei filesystem
.SH STORIA
Il comando 
.B swapon
è apparso nel BSD 4.0.
.SH AUTORI
Si veda la pagina di manuale di
.BR mount (8)
di Linux per una lista completa degli autori. I principali collaboratori 
comprendono Doug Quale, H. J. Lu, Rick Sladkey, and Stephen Tweedie.



