'\" t
.\" Man page by Dale Scheetz
.TH cr 1 "2 April 96" "Debian Linux"
.SH NAME
cr \- converts text files between nix EOL and dos EOL

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBcr\fP  - | +  <input file> <output file>

.SH DESCRIPTION

.LP
Text files, such as tle files, that come from a dos source usualy have the
^M symbol at the end of every line. Cr converts files between the dos
newline format and the normal *nix newline format by stripping the ^M to
convert dos to *nix, using the '-' option, or adding the ^M to a *nix file
to create the proper dos file when the '+' option is used.
.LP
Although this extra character is not often a problem, programs like seesat5,
which are data driven will encounter parsing problems when the extra
character is present. It is these problems that cr is intended to repair.

.SS Options
.TP
\fB- | +
One or the other of these options is required. The '-' option is used to
remove ^M from all newlines found in the dos file. The '+' option is used to
add ^M to every newline found in a *nix file.
.TP
\fBinput file\fP
Fully delineated path to the input file. As this program is used in the dos
environment as well, standard input is not used.
.TP
\fBoutput file\fP
Fully delineated path to the output file. As this program is used in the dos
environment as well, standart output is not used.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
seesat5(1), seesat5(7), SEESAT5.INI(5), tle(5)
.SH BUGS
Cr is not an inteligent program. It methodicaly replaces/removes the
offending character when it finds it in the correct context. Newline
sequences found in contexts other than 'newline' will be replaced/removed
just like those found in the proper context. Passing a binary file
through cr is not advised, for this reason. Send all inqueries to Dale
Scheetz <dwarf@polaris.net>.
