
********************************************************************* 
(C) COPYRIGHT 1995 UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
*********************************************************************

This software was authored by

D. Levine
Mathematics and Computer Science Division Argonne National Laboratory
Argonne IL 60439
levine@mcs.anl.gov
(708) 252-6735
(708) 252-5986 (FAX)

with programming assistance of participants in Argonne National 
Laboratory's SERS program.

This program contains material protectable under copyright laws of the 
United States.  Permission is hereby granted to use it, reproduce it, 
to translate it into another language, and to redistribute it to 
others at no charge except a fee for transferring a copy, provided 
that you conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy the 
University of Chicago's copyright notice, and the disclaimer of 
warranty and Government license included below.  Further, permission 
is hereby granted, subject to the same provisions, to modify a copy or 
copies or any portion of it, and to distribute to others at no charge 
materials containing or derived from the material.

The developers of the software ask that you acknowledge its use in any 
document referencing work based on the  program, such as published 
research.  Also, they ask that you supply to Argonne National 
Laboratory a copy of any published research referencing work based on 
the software.

Any entity desiring permission for further use must contact:

J. Gleeson
Industrial Technology Development Center Argonne National Laboratory
Argonne IL 60439
gleesonj@smtplink.eid.anl.gov
(708) 252-6055

******************************************************************** 
DISCLAIMER

THIS PROGRAM WAS PREPARED AS AN ACCOUNT OF WORK SPONSORED BY AN AGENCY 
OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT.  NEITHER THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO, 
THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT NOR ANY OF THEIR EMPLOYEES MAKE ANY 
WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, OR ASSUMES ANY LEGAL LIABILITY OR 
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE ACCURACY, COMPLETENESS, OR USEFULNESS OF ANY 
INFORMATION OR PROCESS DISCLOSED, OR REPRESENTS THAT ITS USE WOULD NOT 
INFRINGE PRIVATELY OWNED RIGHTS.

********************************************************************** 
GOVERNMENT LICENSE

The Government is granted for itself and others acting on its behalf a 
paid-up, non-exclusive, irrevocable worldwide license in this computer 
software to reproduce, prepare derivative works, and perform publicly 
and display publicly.
