.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 1992 Drew Eckhardt;
.\"                               1993 Michael Haardt, Ian Jackson.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Wed Jul 21 19:42:57 1993, Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Traduction 9/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH ALARM 2 "9 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
alarm \- Programmer un reveil (timer) pour l'emission d'un signal.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "unsigned int alarm(unsigned int " nb_sec );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR alarm 
programme une temporisation pour qu'elle envoie un signal 
.BR SIGALRM
au processus en cours dans
.I nb_sec
secondes. Si le signal n'est pas masque ou intercepte, sa
reception terminera le processus.

Les programmations successives d'alarmes ne sont pas empilees,
chaque appel de
.B alarm
annule l'eventuelle programmation precedente.

Si
.I nb_sec
vaut zero, aucune
.B alarme
n'est planifiee.


.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.B alarm
renvoie le nombre de secondes qu'il restait de la programmation
precedente (annulee), ou zero si aucune 
alarme n'avait ete planifiee auparavant.

.SH NOTES
les fonctions
.BR alarm " et " setitimer
partagent la meme temporisation, aussi l'appel de l'une interfere avec
l'utilisation de l'autre.

Les delais dus au multitache peuvent, comme toujours, retarder
le declenchement d'une alarme d'une duree arbitraire.

.SH "CONFORME A"
SVID, AT&T, POSIX, X/OPEN, BSD 4.3
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR setitimer "(2), " signal "(2), " sigaction "(2), "
.BR gettimeofday "(2), " select "(2), " pause "(2), " sleep (3)
