.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt
.\" (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de),
.\" Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Wed Jul 21 19:52:58 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Sun Aug 21 17:40:38 1994 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Traduction 9/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH BRK 2 "9 Octobre 1996" "Linux 0.99.11" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
brk, sbrk \- Modifier la taille du segment de donnees
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int brk(void *" fin_segment_donnee );
.br
.BI "void *sbrk(ptrdiff_t" increment );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B brk
positionne la fin du segment de donnees (le premier mot memoire hors
de la zone accessible) a l'adresse specifiee par
.IR fin_segment_donnee.
.I fin_segment_donnee
doit etre superieur a la fin du segment de texte, et doit etre 16 Ko 
avant la fin de la pile.

.B sbrk
incremente l'espace de donnees du programme de
.I increment
octets. 
.B sbrk
n'est pas un appel systeme, juste une fonction de la bibliotheque C.
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.B brk
renvoie 0 s'il reussit.

.B sbrk
retourne un pointeur sur le debut de la nouvelle zone de donnees. 

En cas d'echec \-1 est renvoye, et
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur
.BR ENOMEM .
.SH "CONFORME A"   
BSD 4.3

.BR brk " et " sbrk
ne sont pas definis dans le C Standard, et sont volontairement exclus
des standards POSIX.1 (paragraphes B.1.1.1.3 et B.8.3.3).
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR execve "(2), " getrlimit "(2), " malloc "(3), " end (3)
