.\" Written by Ralf Baechle (ralf@waldorf-gmbh.de),
.\" Copyright (c) 1994, 1995 Waldorf GMBH
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Traduction 14/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH CACHEFLUSH 2 "14 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
cacheflush \- Vide le contenu des memoires caches.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <asm/cachectl.h>
.sp
.BI "int cacheflush(char *" addr ", int "nbytes ", int "cache ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cacheflush
vide le contenu des memoires caches de l'espace d'adressage
utilisateur compris entre addr et (addr+nbytes-1). 
La memoire cache est l'une des suivantes :
.TP
.B ICACHE
Memoire cache d'instructions
.TP
.B DCACHE
Reecriture du cache et desactivation du cache concerne
.TP
.B BCACHE
ientique
.B (ICACHE|DCACHE).
.PP
.SH "VALEUR RENVOEE"
.B cacheflush
renvoie 0 s'il reussit. En cas d'echec, \-1 est renvoye et
.I errno 
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP
.B EINVAL
Le parametre de cache n'est pas l'un des trois mentionnes ci-dessus.
.TP
.B EFAULT
Une partie de l'espace d'adressage entre addr et (addr+nbytes-1) n'est pas accessible.
.PP
.SH BUGS
L'implementation actuelle ignore les parametres addr et nbytes. A la place,
le cache entier est toujours vide.
.SH NOTE
Cet appel systeme n'est disponible que sur les systemes MIPS.

.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR cachectl "(2)"
