.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de)
.\" Modified Wed Jul 21 22:10:52 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 15 April 1995 by Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com):
.\"   Added 'fchdir'.
.\"   Fix bugs in error section.
.\"
.\" Traduction 9/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH CHDIR 2 "9 Octobre 1996" "Linux 1.2.4" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM 
chdir, fchdir \- Changer le repertoire courant.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int chdir(const char *" path );
.br
.BI "int fchdir(int " fd ");"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chdir
remplace le repertoire courant par celui specifie dans le chemin
.IR path .
.PP
.B fchdir
est identique a
.BR chdir ,
sauf que le repertoire cible est fourni sous forme de descripteur
de fichier.
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE" 
.BR chdir " et " fchdir
renvoient 0 s'ils reussissent, ou \-1 s'ils echouent, auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
Suivant le type de systeme de fichiers, plusieurs erreurs peuvent
etre renvoyees, les plus courantes sont les suivantes :

.TP 0.8i
.B EPERM
Le processus n'a pas la permission "execution" dans le repertoire.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I path
pointe en dehors de l'espace d'adressage accessible.
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I path
est trop long.
.TP
.B EBADF
Le descripteur de fichier
.I fd
est invalide
.TP
.B ENOENT
Le fichier n'existe pas.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Pas assez de memoire pour le noyau.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
Un element du chemin d'acces n'est pas un repertoire.
.TP
.B EACCES
L'acces n'est pas autorise sur un element du chemin.
.TP
.B ELOOP
.I path
contient des references circulaires (a travers un lien symbolique)
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR getcwd "(3), " chroot (2)
