.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Portions extracted from /usr/include/sys/socket.h, which does not have
.\" any authorship information in it.  It is probably available under the GPL.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\"
.\" Other portions are from the 6.9 (Berkeley) 3/10/91 man page:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"     This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"     California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" Traduction 10/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH CONNECT 2 "10 Octobre 1996" "Linux 0.99.11" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
connect \- Debuter une connexion sur une socket
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.sp
.BI "int connect(int " sockfd ", struct sockaddr *" serv_addr ", int
.BI " addrlen );
.SH DESCRIPTION
Le parametre
.I sockfd
est une socket.

Cette fonction est principalement utilisee pour les processus
clients orientes\-connexion. 

Si la socket est du type
.BR SOCK_DGRAM ,
cette fonction indique le correspondant avec lequel la socket doit
communiquer, c'est l'adresse a laquelle les datagrammes seront envoyes, et
la seule adresse depuis laquelle les datagrammes seront recus.

Si la socket est du type
.B SOCK_STREAM,
cette fonction tente de se connecter a une autre socket. L'adresse de
l'autre socket est indiquee par
.BR serv_addr,
qui doit etre dans le meme domaine que la socket initiale.

Chaque domaine de communication interprete le parametre
.BR serv_addr,
a sa maniere. En general, les sockets stream ne reussissent un appel
.B connect
qu'une seule fois, alors qu'une meme socket datagramme peut appeler
.B connect
plusieurs fois pour changer son affectation. Une socket datagramme
peut interrompre son affectation en se connectant sur adresse invalide
(par exemple nulle).
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.BR connect
renvoie 0 s'il reussit, ou \-1 s'il echouer, auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
Voir le noyau Linux pour les details.
.SH HISTORIQUE
La fonction
.B connect
est apparue pour la premiere fois dans BSD 4.2.
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR accept "(2), " bind "(2), " listen "(2), "
.BR socket "(2), " getsockname (2)
