.\" Copyright 1995 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Written 11 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\" Modified 22 July 1995 by Michael Chastain (mec@duracef.shout.net):
.\"   Derived from 'readdir.2'.
.\" 
.\" Traduction  11/10/1996 Christophe BLAESS (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\" 
.TH GETDENTS 2  "11 Octobre 1996" "Linux 1.3.6" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
getdents \- Obtenir les points d'entree d'un repertoire.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <unistd.h>
.B #include <linux/dirent.h>
.B #include <linux/unistd.h>
.sp
.B _syscall3(int, getdents, uint, fd, struct dirent *, dirp, uint, count);
.sp
.BI "int getdents(unsigned int " fd ", struct dirent *" dirp ", unsigned int " count );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B getdents
lit plusieurs structures
.I dirent
depuis un repertoire pointe par le descripteur de fichier
.I fd
et les place dans la zone de memoire pointee par
.IR dirp .
Le parametre
.I count
est la taille de la zone memoire.
.PP
La structure 
.I dirent
est declaree ainsi :
.PP
.RS
.nf
struct dirent
{
    long d_ino;                 /* numero d'i-noeud            */
    off_t d_off;                /* distance au prochain dirent */
    unsigned short d_reclen;    /* longueur de ce dirent       */
    char d_name [NAME_MAX+1];   /* nom de fichier (fini par 0) */
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
.I d_off
est la distance entre le debut du repertoire et le debut de la structure
.IR dirent 
suivante.
.I d_reclen
est la taille complete de
.IR dirent .
.PP
Cette fonction remplace
.BR readdir (2).
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.B getdents
renvoie le nombre d'octets lus s'il reussit (0 en fin de repertoire),
ou \-1 en cas d'echec, auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.  
.SH ERREURS
.TP
.B EBADF
.IR fd
n'est pas un descripteur de fichier valide.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
Le descripteur de fichier ne pointe pas sur un repertoire.
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR readdir (2),
.BR readdir (3)
