.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Updated with additions from Mitchum DSouza (m.dsouza@mrc-apu.cam.ac.uk)
.\" Portions Copyright 1993 Mitchum DSouza (m.dsouza@mrc-apu.cam.ac.uk)
.\"
.\" 
.\" Traduction  10/10/1996 Christophe BLAESS (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\" 
.TH GETHOSTID 2 "11 Octobre 1996" "Linux 0.99.13" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
gethostid, sethostid \- Lit ou ecrit l'identifiant de l'hote.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B long int gethostid(void);
.br
.BR "int sethostid(long int " hostid )
.SH DESCRIPTION
Lit ou ecrit un identifiant unique sur 32 bits pour la station utilisee.
Cet identificateur est cense etre unique pour l'ensemble des stations
UNIX existantes. Il correspond generalement a l'adresse Internet de
la machine locale, comme renvoye par
.BR gethostbyname (3),
et est normalement fixe une fois pour toutes.

L'appel de
.B sethostid
est bien sur limite au Super\-User.

.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.B gethostid
retourne l'identifiant sur 32 bits de l'hote, tel qu'il
a ete positionne par
.BR sethostid (2).
.SH "CONFORME A"
POSIX.1 ne definit pas ces fonctions, mais ISO/IEC 9945\-1:1990 les
mentionne dau paragraphe B.4.4.1.
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR hostid "(1), " gethostbyname (3)
