.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified 22 July 1995 by Michael Chastain (mec@duracef.shout.net):
.\"   'gethostname' is real system call on Linux/Alpha.
.\" 
.\" Traduction  11/10/1996 Christophe BLAESS (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\" 
.TH GETHOSTNAME 2 "11 Octobre 1996" "Linux 1.3.6" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
gethostname, sethostname \- Lire / ecrire le nom d'hote.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int gethostname(char *" name ", size_t " len );
.br
.BI "int sethostname(const char *" name ", size_t " len );
.SH DESCRIPTION
Ces fonctions sont utilisees pour lire, ou changer le nom d'hote de
la machine utilisee.
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.BR gethostname " et " sethostname
renvoient 0 s'ils reussissent, ou \-1 s'ils echouent, auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I len
est negatif, ou pour
.BR sethostname ,
.I len
est plus grand que la longeur maximale autorisee,
ou encore, pour
.BR gethostname
sur Linux/i386,
.I len
est plus petit que la taille necessaire.
.TP
.B EPERM
Pour
.BR sethostname ,
l'appelant n'est pas le Super\-User.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I name
pointe en dehors de l'espace d'adressage accessible.
.SH "CONFORME A"
POSIX.1 ne definit pas ces fonctions, mais ISO/IEC 9945\-1:1990 les mentionne
a paragraphe B.4.4.1.
.SH BUGS
Certaines implementations de
.B gethostname
retourne sans erreurs
.I len
octets meme si
.I name
est plus grand.
Linux/Alpha se comporte ainsi.
Linux/i386, toutefois renvoie
.B EINVAL
dans ce cas (dans la bibliotheque DLL 4.6.27).
.SH NOTES
Sous Linux/Alpha,
.B gethostname
est un appel systeme.
Sous Linux/i386,
.B gethostname
est implemente au niveau bibliotheque en appelant
.BR uname (2).
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR getdomainname "(2), " setdomainname "(2), " uname (2)
