.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Portions from /usr/include/unistd.h are
.\"               Copyright (C) 1991, 1992 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Traduction 11/10/1996 Christophe BLAESS (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH GETPAGESIZE 2 "11 Octobre 1996" "Linux 0.99.11" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
getpagesize \- Obtenir la taille des pages du systeme.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B size_t getpagesize(void);
.SH DESCRIPTION
Retourne le nombre d'octets dans une page. C'est la taille des pages
du systeme, et pas necessairement celle des pages memoire materielles.
.SH NOTES
.B getpagesize
est implemente en tant que fonction de la bibliotheque DLL 4.4.1.  
Suivant les options de compilation de la bibliotheque, cette fonction
retourne
.B EXEC_PAGESIZE
(4096 pour Linux 0.99.11),
.B NBPG
(4096 pour Linux 0.99.11), ou
.B NBPC
(non defini pour Linux 0.99.11 ou la DLL 4.4.1).
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR sbrk (2)
