.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" 
.\" Traduction  10/10/1996 Christophe BLAESS (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\" 
.TH GETPID 2 "10 Octobre 1996" "Linux 0.99.11" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
getpid, getppid \- Obtenir l'identifiant d'un processus.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B pid_t getpid(void);
.br
.B pid_t getppid(void);
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B getpid
retourne l'ID du processus actif. Ceci est souvent utilise par des
routines qui creent des fichers temporaires uniques.

.B getppid
retourne le PID du processus parent de celui en cours. Ceci est
regulierement utilise apres un 
.BR "fork "(2)
pour etablir la communication entre les deux processus issus du
meme programme.
.SH ERREURS
Ces fonctions reussissent toujours.
.SH "CONFORME A"
POSIX, BSD 4.3, SVID
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR exec "(2), " fork "(2), " kill "(2), "
.br
.BR mkstemp "(3), " tmpnam "(3), " tempnam "(3), " tmpfile (3)
