.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Traduction 14/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH GETSID 2 "14 Octobre 1996" "Linux 1.3.86" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
getsid \- Obtenir l'identifiant de session.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B pid_t getsid(void);
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B getsid(0)
renvoie l'identifiant de session du processus appelant.
.BI getsid( p )
renvoie l'identifiant de session du processus de PID 
.IR p .
.SH ERREURS
En cas d'erreur, \-1 est retourne.
La seule erreur possible est
.B ESRCH, 
quand il n'y a pas de processus de PID numero
.I p.
.SH "CONFORME A"
Cet appel-systeme est specifique a Linux
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR setsid (2).
