.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de)
.\" Modified Fri Jul 23 21:26:27 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 21 Aug 1994 by Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com):
.\"   Fixed necessary '#include' lines.
.\" Modified 15 Apr 1995 by Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com):
.\"   Added reference to adjtimex.
.\" Removed some nonsense lines pointed out by urs@isnogud.escape.de (Urs Thuermann),
.\"   aeb, 950722.
.\"
.\" 
.\" Traduction  10/10/1996 Christophe BLAESS (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\" 
.TH GETTIMEOFDAY 2 "10 Octobre 1996" "Linux 1.2.4" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
gettimeofday, settimeofday \- Lire / ecrire l'heure actuelle.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/time.h>
.br
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int gettimeofday(struct timeval *" tv ", struct timezone *" tz );
.br
.BI "int settimeofday(const struct timeval *" tv
.BI ", const struct timezone *" tz );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gettimeofday
et
.B settimeofday
peuvent programmer l'heure ainsi que le fuseau horaire (timezone).
.I tv
est une structure
.B timeval 
decrite dans /usr/include/sys/time.h :
.sp
.nf
struct timeval {
.in 22
int	tv_sec;		/* secondes */
int	tv_usec;	/* microsecondes */
};
.in 10
.fi
.PP
.sp
et
.I tz
est une structure 
.B timezone 
decrite egalement dans /usr/include/sys/time.h:
.sp
.nf
struct timezone {
.in 23
int	tz_minuteswest;
/* minutes west of Greenwich */
int	tz_dsttime;
/* type de changement horaire */
};
.in 10
.fi
.PP
Les changements horaires (Daylight saving \- DST) sont
definis comme suit :
.PP
.B DST_NONE  
/* Aucun */
.br
.B DST_USA   
/* USA */
.br
.B DST_AUST  
/* Australie */
.br
.B DST_WET   
/* Europe occidentale */
.br
.B DST_MET   
/* Europe centrale */
.br
.B DST_EET   
/* Europe Orientale */
.br
.B DST_CAN   
/* Canada */
.br
.B DST_GB    
/* Grande Bretagne et Irlande */
.br
.B DST_RUM   
/* Roumanie */
.br
.B  DST_TUR   
/* Turkie */
.br
.B DST_AUSTALT
/* Australie avec decallage en 1986 */
.PP
Les macros suivantes permettent de manipuler les
structures timeval :
.br
.nf
#define	timerisset(tvp)\\
.ti 18
((tvp)->tv_sec || (tvp)->tv_usec)
indique si le timer est non-nul.
.sp
#define	timercmp(tvp, uvp, cmp)\\
.in 18
((tvp)->tv_sec cmp (uvp)->tv_sec ||\\
(tvp)->tv_sec == (uvp)->tv_sec &&\\
(tvp)->tv_usec cmp (uvp)->tv_usec)
compare deux timers.
.sp
.in 10
#define timerclear(tvp)\\
.ti 18
((tvp)->tv_sec = (tvp)->tv_usec = 0)
efface un timer
.fi
.PP
Si
.I tv
ou 
.I tz
est nulle, la structure correspondante n'est ni programmee ni retournee.
.PP
Seul le Super\-User peut appeler
.BR settimeofday .
.SH ERREURS
.TP
.B EPERM 
.B settimeofday
est appele par quelqu'un d'autre que le Super\-User
.TP
.B EINVAL
le fuseau horaire est invalide.
.SH "CONFORME A"
BSD 4.3
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR date "(1), " adjtimex "(2), " time "(2), " ctime "(3), " ftime "(3)"
