.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Portions extracted from linux/mm/swap.c:
.\"                Copyright (C) 1991, 1992  Linus Torvalds
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified 21 Aug 1994 by Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com):
.\"   Added text about calling restriction (new in kernel 1.1.20 I believe).
.\"   N.B. calling "idle" from user process used to hang process!
.\" "
.\" Traduction 14/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH IDLE 2 "14 Octobre 1996" "Linux 1.1.46" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
idle \- Rend le processus 0 inactif.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B void idle(void);
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B idle
est un appel-systeme interne, utilise pendant le demarrage du systeme.
Il sert a rendre swappables les pages du processus, a abaisser sa
priorite, et entrer dans la boucle principale de l'ordonnanceur.
.B idle
ne retourne jamais.
.PP
Seul le processus 0 peut appeler
.BR idle .
Tout processus utilisateur, meme avec les privileges de Super\-User
declenchera l'erreur
.BR EPERM
s'il tente d'appeler
.BR idel.
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.B idle
ne retourne jamais lorsqu'il est appele par le processus 0,
et renvoie toujours \-1 aux processus utilisateurs.
.SH ERREURS
.TP 0.8i
.B EPERM
Toujours declenchee pour un processus utilisateur.
