.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)ioctl.2	6.4 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Fri Jul 23 21:38:19 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" 
.\" Traduction  10/10/1996 Christophe BLAESS (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\" 
.TH IOCTL 2 "10 Octobre 1996" BSD "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
ioctl \- Controler les peripheriques.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/ioctl.h>
.sp
.BI "int ioctl(int " d ", int " requete ", ...)"
.sp
[Le "troisieme" argument est traditionnellement \fBchar *\fIargp\fR, et sera ainsi
nomme dans le reste de cette page.]
.SH DESCRIPTION
La fonction
.B ioctl
modifie le comportement des peripheriques sous-jacents des fichiers speciaux.
En particulier, de nombreuses caracteristiques des fichiers speciaux en
mode caracteres (par exemple des terminaux) peuvent etre controlees avec
des requetes
.BR ioctl .
L'argument
.I d
doit etre un descripteur de fichier ouvert.

La
.I requete
ioctl encapsule le fait que l'argument est un parametre
.I d'entree
ou de 
.I sortie
ansi que la taille de l'argument
.I argp
en octets. Les macros et constantes symboliques decrivant les
.I requetes
ioctl se trouvent dans le fichier
.IR sys/ioctl.h .
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.BR ioctl
renvoie 0 s'il reussit, ou \-1 s'il echoue, auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP 0.7i
.B EBADF
.I d
n'est pas un descripteur de fichier valide.
.TP
.B ENOTTY
.I d
n'est pas associe avec un fichier special en mode caractere.
.TP
.B ENOTTY
La requete specifiee ne s'applique pas au type d'objet associe avec
le descripteur
.IR d .
.TP
.B EINVAL
La
.I requete
ou l'argument
.I argp
n'est pas valide.
.SH HISTORIQUE
La fonction
.B ioctl
est apparue dans AT&T UNIX Version 7.
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR ioctl_list "(2), " execve "(2), " fcntl "(2), " mt "(4), " sd "(4), " tty (4)
