.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com), 15 April 1995.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Traduction 14/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH IPC 2 "14 Octobre 1996" "Linux 1.2.4" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
ipc \- Appeler les fonctions IPC du Systeme V.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "int ipc(unsigned int" " call, " "int" " first, " "int" " second, "
.BI "int" " third, " "void *" "ptr, " "long" " fifth);"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ipc
est un point d'entree au noyau commun pour les appels systemes
IPC du Systeme V, concernant les messages, les semaphores et la
memoire partagee.
.I call
indique la fonction IPC a invoquer.
Les autres arguments sont transmis a l'appel systeme approprie.
.PP
Les programmes utilisateurs doivent appeler les fonctions par leurs
noms habituels. Seuls les implementeurs de bibliotheques standards et
les hackers Linux peuvent avoir besoin d'employer
.BR ipc .
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR msgctl (2),
.BR msgget (2),
.BR msgrcv (2),
.BR msgsnd (2),
.BR semctl (2),
.BR semget (2),
.BR semop (2),
.BR shmat (2),
.BR shmctl (2),
.BR shmdt (2),
.BR shmget (2)
