.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)listen.2	6.5 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Fri Jul 23 22:07:54 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 950727 by aeb, following a suggestion by Urs Thuermann
.\" (urs@isnogud.escape.de)
.\"
.\" Traduction  11/10/1996 Christophe BLAESS (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\" 
.\"
.TH LISTEN 2 "11 Octobre 1996" BSD "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
listen \- Attendre des connexions sur une socket.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.sp
.BI "int listen(int " s ", int " backlog );
.SH DESCRIPTION

.B listen
est generalement utilise avec des processus serveurs orientes\-connexion.

Pour accepter des connexions, une socket est d'abord cree avec
.BR socket (2),
puis le desir d'accepter des connexions entrantes, et la limite
de la file d'entree sont indiques avec
.BR listen ,
ensuite les connexions seront acceptees avec
.BR accept (2).
L'appel systeme
.B listen
s'applique seulement aux sockets de type
.B SOCK_STREAM
ou
.B SOCK_SEQPACKET.

Le parametre
.I backlog
definit une longueur maximale pour la file des connexions en attente.
Si une nouvelle connexion arrrive alors que la file est pleine, le
client recoit une erreur indiquant
.BR ECONNREFUSED ,
ou, si le protocole sous-jacent supporte les retranmissions, la requete
peut etre ignoree afin qu'un nouvel essai reussisse.
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.BR listen
renvoie 0 si il reussit, ou \-1 en cas d'echec, auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP 0.8i
.B EBADF
.I s
n'est pas un descripteur valide
.TP
.B ENOTSOCK
L'argument
.I s
n'est pas une socket.
.TP
.B EOPNOTSUPP
Le type de socket ne supporte pas l'appel systeme
.BR listen .
.SH HISTORIQUE
La fonction
.B listen
est apparue dans BSD 4.2.
.SH BUGS
Si la socket est de type AF_INET (internet), et si l'argument
.I backlog
est superieur a 128, il est silencieusement ramene a 128.
Pour la portabilite des applications, ne vous fiez pas a
cette valeur puisque BSD (et d'autres derives) limitent
l'argument
.I backlog 
a 5.
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR accept "(2), " connect "(2), " socket (2)
