.\" Copyright 1995 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Written 10 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" 
.\" Traduction  10/10/1996 Christophe BLAESS (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\" 
.TH LLSEEK 2 "10 Octobre 1996" "Linux 1.2.9" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
_llseek \- Positionner la tete de lecture/ecriture dans un fichier.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B #include <linux/unistd.h>
.sp
.B _syscall5(int, _llseek, uint, fd, ulong, hi, ulong, lo, loff_t *, res, uint, wh);
.sp
.BI "int _llseek(unsigned int " fd ", unsigned long " offset_high ", unsigned long " offset_low ", loff_t * " result ", unsigned int " whence );
.SH DESCRIPTION
La fonction
.B _llseek
place la tete de lecture/ecriture du fichier associe a
.I fd
a la position
.I (offset_high << 32) | offset_low
(en octets) par rapport au debut du fichier, a la position courante, ou a la
fin du fichier, suivant que la valeur
.I  whence
soit
.BR SEEK_SET ,
.BR SEEK_CUR ,
ou
.BR SEEK_END ,
respectivement.
La fonction retourne la nouvelle position dans l'argument
.IR result .

.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
En cas de reussite,
.B _llseek
renvoie 0 s'il reussit, ou \-1 s'il echoue, auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
n'est pas un descripteur de fichier ouvert.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I whence
est invalide.
.SH "CONFORME A"
Cette fonction est specifique a Linux
.SH BUGS
Il n'est pas possibile d'utiliser llseek
sur un fichier de plus de 4Go.
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR lseek (2)
