.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)lseek.2	6.5 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Fri Jul 23 22:17:00 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 10 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" 
.\" Traduction  10/10/1996 Christophe BLAESS (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\" 
.TH LSEEK 2 "10 Octobre 1996" "Linux 1.2.9" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
lseek \- Positionner la tete de lecture/ecriture dans un fichier.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "off_t lseek(int " fildes ", off_t " offset ", int " whence );
.SH DESCRIPTION
La fonction
.B lseek
place la tete de lecture/ecriture
a la position
.I offset
dans le fichier associe au descripteur
.I fildes
en suivant la directive
.IR  whence.
L'argument
.I fildes
doit etre un descripteur de fichier ouvert.

.B Lseek
positionne la tete de lecture/ecriture dans
.I fildes
comme suit :
.RS
.sp
Si
.I whence
vaut
.BR SEEK_SET ,
la nouvelle position est 
.I offset
octets depuis le debut du fichier.

Si
.I whence
vaut
.BR SEEK_CUR ,
la tete de lecture/ecriture est avancee de
.I offset
octets.

Si
.I whence
vaut
.BR SEEK_END ,
la tete est placee a la fin du fichier plus
.I offset
octets.
.RE

La fonction
.B lseek
permet de placer la tete au\-dela de la fin actuelle du fichier.
Si des donnees sont ecrites a cet emplacement, une lecture ulterieure
de l'espace intermediaire retournera des zeros (jusqu'a ce que
d'autres donnees y soient ecrites).

Certains peripheriques ne permettent pas de positionnement direct,
la valeur de la tete de lecture/ecriture avec de tels peripheriques est indefinie.
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.B lseek
renvoie 0 s'il reussit, ou \-1 s'il echoue, auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP
.B EBADF
.I Fildes
n'est pas un descripteur de fichier ouvert.
.TP
.B ESPIPE
.I Fildes
est associee a un tube (pipe), une socket, ou une file FIFO.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I Whence
est invalide.
.SH "CONFORME A"
POSIX, BSD 4.3
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR dup "(2), " open "(2), " fseek (3)
