.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Michael Chastain (mec@duracef.shout.net), 22 July 1995.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Traduction 14/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH MODIFY_LDT 2 "14 Octobre 1996" "Linux 1.3.6" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
modify_ldt \- Lire ou ecrire la LDT.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <linux/ldt.h>
.B #include <linux/unistd.h>
.sp
.B _syscall3( int, modify_ldt, int, func, void *, ptr, unsigned long, bytecount )
.sp
.BI "int modify_ldt(int " "func" ", void *" "ptr" ", unsigned long " "bytecount" ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B modify_ldt
lit ou ecrit la table des descripteurs locaux (Local Descriptor Table) du
processus.
La LDT est une table de gestion memoire par processus utilisee par les
processeurs i386. Pour plus d'information sur cette table, se reporter
au manuel Intel 386.
.PP
Quand
.I func
vaut 0,
.B modify_ldt
lit la LDT et la place dans la memoire pointee par
.IR ptr .
Le nombre d'octets lus est le minimum entre
.I bytecount
et la vraie taille de la LDT.
.PP
Quand
.I func
vaut 1,
.B modify_ldt
modifie une entree de la LDT.
.I ptr
pointe sur une structure
.I modify_ldt_ldt_s
et
.I bytecount
doit etre egal a la taille de cette structure.
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
S'il reussit
.B modify_ldt
renvoie soit le nombre d'octets lus soit
0 (ecriture).
En cas d'echec \-1 est renvoye et
.IR errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP
.B ENOSYS
.I func
n'est ni 0 ni 1.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I ptr
est nul, ou
.I bytecount
n'est pas egal a la taille de la structure
.IR modify_ldt_ldt_s ,
ou
la nouvelle entree de LDT a des valeurs illegales.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I ptr
pointe en dehors de l'espace d'adressage accessible.
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR vm86 (2)
