.\" Copyright (C) 1995, Thomas K. Dyas <tdyas@eden.rutgers.edu>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Created   Sat Aug 21 1995     Thomas K. Dyas <tdyas@eden.rutgers.edu>
.\"
.\" typo corrected, aeb, 950825
.\"
.\" Traduction 12/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH PERSONALITY 2 "12 Octobre 1996" "Linux 1.3.20" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
personality \- Indiquer le domaine d'execution du processus.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "int personality(unsigned long " persona );
.SH DESCRIPTION
Linux propose differents domaines d'execution, ou personnalites, pour
chaque processus.
Entre autres choses, le domaine d'execution indique au noyau la maniere
de convertir les numeros de signaux en actions.
Le domaine d'execution permet a Linux d'offrir un support (limite) a
des fichiers binaires compiles sous d'autres systemes d'exploitation
compatibles Unix.

.B personality
va utiliser le domaine d'execution reference par la valeur
.I persona
comme domaine d'execution du processus courant.

.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
. personality
renvoie l'ancienne valeur
.I persona 
s'il reussit, ou \-1 s'il echoue, auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP 0.8i
.B EINVAL
.I persona
ne reference pas un domaine d'execution valide.
.PP
.SH "CONFORME A"
.B personality
est specifique a Linux
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
/usr/include/linux/personality.h

