.\" Copyright 1995 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Written 11 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\" Modified 22 July 1995 by Michael Chastain (mec@duracef.shout.net):
.\"   In 1.3.X, returns only one entry each time; return value is different.
.\"
.\" Traduction  12/10/1996 Christophe BLAESS (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\" 
.TH READDIR 2  "12 Octobre 1996" "Linux 1.3.6" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
readdir \- Lire une entree de repertoire.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <unistd.h>
.B #include <linux/dirent.h>
.B #include <linux/unistd.h>
.sp
.B _syscall3(int, readdir, uint, fd, struct dirent *, dirp, uint, count);
.sp
.BI "int readdir(unsigned int " fd ", struct dirent *" dirp ", unsigned int " count );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
Cette fonction n'est normalement pas interessante
pour les programmeurs.
Utiliser
.BR readdir (3)
pour les fonctionnalitees conformes POSIX.
Cette page documente l'interface de l'appel systeme bas niveau,
qui peut changer, et qui est remplacee par
.BR getdents (2).
.PP
.B readdir
lit une structure
.I dirent
depuis le repertoire pointe par
.I fd
et la place en memoire dans la zone pointee par
.IR dirp.

Le parametre
.I count
est ignore, au plus une structure dirent est lue.
.PP
La structure 
.I dirent
est declaree comme suit :
.PP
.RS
.nf
struct dirent
{
    long d_ino;                 /* inode number */
    off_t d_off;                /* offset to this \fIdirent\fP */
    unsigned short d_reclen;    /* length of this \fId_name\fP */
    char d_name [NAME_MAX+1];   /* file name (null-terminated) */
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
.I d_ino
est un numero d'i-node.

.I d_off
est la distance entre le debut du repertoire et cette
structure
.IR dirent.

.I d_reclen
est la longueur
.IR d_name,
sans compter le caractere nul final.

.I d_name
est le nom de fichier termine par un caractere nul.
.PP
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.BR readdir
renvoie 1 s'il reussit, 0 en fin de repertoire, ou \-1 s'il echoue, 
auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH "ERREURS"
.TP
.B EBADF
.IR fd
est invalide.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
Le descripteur est associe a un fichier, pas a un repertoire.
.SH "CONFORME A"
Cet appel-systeme est specifique a Linux
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR getdents (2),
.BR readdir (3)
