.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de)
.\"
.\" Tue Jul  6 22:36:09 MDT 1993 (dminer@nyx.cs.du.edu)
.\"  Made this clearer...
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 00:16:05 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Traduction 13/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH REBOOT 2 "13 Octobre 1996" "Linux 0.99.10" "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
reboot \- Rebooter ou desactiver Ctrl-Alt-Suppr.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int reboot (int " magic ", int " magic_too ", int " flag );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B reboot
fait redemarrer le systeme, ou active/desactive la sequence de 
touches Ctrl-Alt-Suppr.
.PP
Si
.I magic 
vaut 0xfee1dead et
.I magictoo 
vaut 672274793, alors l'action entreprise depend de la valeur de
.IR flag .
.sp

Si \fIflag\fP vaut 0x1234567, un redemarrage materiel est declenche.
.br
Si \fIflag\fP vaut 0x89abcdef, alors la sequence Ctrl-Alt-Suppr est activee.
.br
If \fIflag\fP = 0, alors la sequence Ctrl-Alt-Suppr est desactive et un signal
est envoye au processus numero 1 (init).

Remarque :
.B reboot() 
n'effectue
.I pas
de
.B sync() !

Evidemment, seul le Super-User peut utiliser cette fonction
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.BR reboot
renvoie 0 s'il reussit, ou \-1 en cas d'echec, auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP 0.8i
.B EINVAL 
Mauvais nombres \fImagiques\fP ou mauvaise valeur de \fIflag\fP.
.TP
.B EPERM
.BR reboot
a ete invoque par un utilisateur normal (pas le Super-User).
.SH "CONFORME A"
.B reboot
est specifique a Linux.
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR sync "(2), " ctrlaltdel "(8), " halt "(8), " reboot (8)
