.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) Tom Bjorkholm & Markus Kuhn, 1996
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" 1996-04-01 Tom Bjorkholm <tomb@mydata.se>
.\"            First version written
.\" 1996-04-10 Markus Kuhn <mskuhn@cip.informatik.uni-erlangen.de>
.\"            revision
.\"
.\" Traduction 14/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH SCHED_YIELD 2 "14 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
sched_yield \- Ceder le processeur
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sched.h>
.sp
\fBint sched_yield(void);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
Un processus peut volontairement liberer le processeur sans se bloquer
en appelant
.BR sched_yield .
Le processus sera alors deplace a la fin de la liste des processus
prets de sa priorite, et un autre processus sera execute.


Note: Si le processus est le seul avec une priorite elevee, il continuera
son execution apres un appel a
.BR sched_yield .

Les systemes POSIX sur lesquels
.B sched_yield
est disponible definissent
.I _POSIX_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING
dans <unistd.h>.

.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.B sched_yield
renvoie 0 s'il reussit ou \-1 s'il echoue auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.

.SH STANDARDS
POSIX.1b (POSIX.4)
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR sched_setscheduler (2) 
pour une description de l'ordonnancement sous Linux
.PP
.I Programming for the real world \- POSIX.4
by Bill O. Gallmeister, O'Reilly & Associates, Inc., ISBN 1-56592-074-0
.br
.I IEEE Std 1003.1b-1993
(POSIX.1b standard)
.br
.I ISO/IEC 9945-1:1996
