.\" Copyright (C), 1994, Graeme W. Wilford. (Wilf.)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Fri Jul 29th 12:56:44 BST 1994  Wilf. (G.Wilford@ee.surrey.ac.uk) 
.\"
.\" Traduction 15/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH SETGID 2 "15 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
setgid \- Fixer l'ID de groupe.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int setgid(gid_t " gid )
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B setgid
fixe le GID effectif du processus en cours. Si l'appelant est
le Super\-User, les GID reels et sauves sont egalement fixes.

Sous Linux
.B setgid
est implemente comme SAVED_IDS sous SYSV.
Ceci permet a un programme Set\-GID (autre que root) d'abandonner
tous ses privileges de groupe, d'effectuer des taches
non\-privilegiees, et de retrouver son GID effectif de maniere
securisee.

Si l'utilisateur est le Super\-User, ou si le programme est Set\-GID
root, des precautions particulieres doivent etre prises.
La fonction
.B setgid
verifie le GID effectif de l'appelant et si c'est le Super\-User,
tous les GID du processus sont mis a
.IR gid.
une fois ceci effectue, il est impossible au programme de retrouver
ses privileges de Super\-User.
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.B setgid
renvoie 0 s'il reussit, ou \-1 s'il echoue, auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP 0.8i
.B EPERM
L'utilisateur n'est pas Super\-User et 
.I gid
ne correspond ni au GID effectif, ni au GID sauve du processus.
.SH "CONFORME A"
System V
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR getgid "(2), " setregid "(2), " setegid (2)
