.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)getpgrp.2	6.4 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 01:15:33 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 15 April 1995 by Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com):
.\"   Added 'getpgid'.
.\"
.\" Traduction 15/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH SETPGID 2 "15 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
setpgid, getpgid, setpgrp, getpgrp \- Fixer ou lire le groupe du processus.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int setpgid(pid_t " pid ", pid_t " pgid );
.br
.BI "pid_t getpgid(pid_t " pid );
.br
.B int setpgrp(void);
.br
.B pid_t getpgrp(void);
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B setpgid
fixe a
.I pgid
l'ID du groupe de processus auquel appartient le processus
mentionne par
.IR pid.
Si
.I pid
vaut zero, le PID du processus en cours est utilise. Si
.I pgid
vaut zero, le PID du processus indique par 
.I pid
est utilise.

.B getpgid
renvoie l'ID du groupe de processus auquel appartient le processus 
indique par
.IR pid .
Si
.I pid
vaut zero, le PID du processus en cours est utilise.

Dans la bibliotheque DLL Linux 4.4.1
.B setpgrp
appelle simplement
.BR setpgid(0,0) .

.B getpgrp
est equivalent a
.BR getpgid(0) .

Les groupes de processus sont utilises pour la distribution de signaux,
et par les terminaux pour controler les requetes de saisie.
Les processus appartenant au meme groupe que le terminal sont
en avant-plan, et peuvent y lire des donnees, alors que les autres sont
en arriere plan et seront bloques s'ils tentent de lire de donnees.

Ces appels sont utilises par des programmes comme
.BR csh (1)
pour creer des groupes de processus afin d'implementer
le controle de jobs.
Les appels
.B TIOCGPGRP
et
.B TIOCSPGRP
decrits
.BR termios (4)
servent a fixer/lire le groupe de processus du terminal de controle.
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.BR setpgid " et " setpgrp
renvoient zero s'ils reussissent, ou \-1 s'ils echouent, auquel
cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.

.I getpgid
renvoie le groupe du processus s'il reussit
ou \-1 s'il echoue, et
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.

.I getpgrp
retourne toujours le groupe du processus courant.
.SH ERREURS
.TP 0.8i
.B EINVAL
.I pgid
est inferieur a 0.
.TP
.B EPERM
Diverses violations d'autorisations
.TP
.B ESRCH
.I pid
ne correspond a aucun processus
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR getuid "(2), " setsid "(2), " tcsetpgrp "(3), " termios (4)
