.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)setregid.2	6.4 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 09:08:49 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Portions extracted from linux/kernel/sys.c:
.\"             Copyright (C) 1991, 1992  Linus Torvalds
.\"             May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.\" Changes: Fri Jul 29 10:56:01 BST 1994 by Wilf. (G.Wilford@ee.surrey.ac.uk)
.\"          Tue Aug  2 14:56:48 BST 1994 by Wilf due to changes in kernel.
.\"
.\" Traduction 15/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH SETREGID 2 "15 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
setregid, setegid \- Fixer le GID reel ou effectif.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int setregid(gid_t " rgid ", gid_t " egid );
.br
.BI "int setegid(gid_t " egid );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B setregid
fixe les GID reel et effectif du processus en cours.
Les utilisateurs non\-privilegies peuvent changer
leur GID reel pour le GID effectif et inversement.

Depuis Linux 1.1.37, il est egalement possible de
fixer le GID effectif a la valeur de l'GID sauve.

Seul le Super\-User peut effectuer d'autres changements.

Fournir une valeur \-1 pour l'un ou l'autre des GID reel ou effectif
conduit le systeme a laisser ce GID inchange.

Actuellement (libc-4.x.x),
.BI setegid( egid )
est fonctionnellement equivalent a
.BI setregid(  -1  , " egid" ).

Si le GID reel est change, ou si le GID effectif est positionne a une valeur
differente du GID reel precedent, le GID sauve va prendre la valeur
du nouveau GID effectif.
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.BR setregid " et " setegid
renvoient zero s'ils reussissent, et \-1 s'ils echouent, auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP 0.8i
.TP
.B EPERM
le processus en cours n'est pas Super\-User et d'autres changement que
.br
(i) l'echange des GID effectif et reel,
.br
(ii) positionner l'un des GID a la valeur de l'autre,
ou 
.br
(iii) placer le GID effectif a la valeur du GID sauve,
ont ete demandes.
.SH HISTORIQUUE
La fonction
.B setregid
est apparue dans BSD 4.2.
.SH "CONFORME A"
BSD 4.3
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR getgid "(2), " setgid (2)
