.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)socketpair.2	6.4 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 10:49:44 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Traduction 13/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH SOCKETPAIR 2 "13 Octobre 1996" BSD "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
socketpair \- Creer uune paire de sockets connectees.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.sp
.BI "int socketpair(int " d ", int " type ", int " protocol ", int " sv [2]);
.SH DESCRIPTION
La fonction
.N socketpair
cree une paire de sockets connectees, sans noms, dans le domaine de
communication
.IR d ,
du
.IR type 
indique, en utilisant le protocole 
.IR protocol .
Les descripteurs correspondants aux deux sockets sont places dans
.IR sv [0]
et
.IR sv [1].
Les deux sockets ne sont pas differenciables.
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.BR socketpair
retourne zero s'il reussit.
En cas d'echec \-1 est renvoye, et
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP 0.8i
.B EMFILE
Trop de descripteurs de fichiers utilises par le processus en cours.
.TP
.B EAFNOSUPPORT
La famille de communication n'est pas supportee sur cette machine.
.TP
.B EPROTONOSUPPORT
La protocole de communication n'est pas supportee sur cette machine.
.TP
.B EOPNOSUPPORT
La protocole de communication mentionne ne permet pas la creation d'une paire de sockets.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I sv
pointe en dehors de l'espace d'adressage accessible.
.SH HISTORIQUE
La fonction
.B socketpair
est apparue dans BSD 4.2.
.SH BUGS
Cet appel systeme n'est actuellement disponible que dans le domaine
.B UNIX.
[Note du documenteur: est-ce vrai pour Linux ?]
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR read "(2), " write "(2), " pipe (2)
