.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de)
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 14:29:17 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Traduction 15/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH TIMES 2 "15 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
times \- Obtenir les statistiques de duree du processus.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/times.h>
.sp
.BI "clock_t times(struct tms *" buf );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B times
stocke les durees statistiques du processus en cours dans
.IR buf .  

.I struct tms
est defini ainsi dans
.IR /usr/include/sys/times.h :
.sp
.nf
struct  tms  {
.in 20
time_t tms_utime;  /* duree utilisateur          */
time_t tms_stime;  /* duree systeme              */
time_t tms_cutime; /* duree utilisateur des fils */
time_t tms_cstime; /* duree systeme des fils     */
};
.in 10
.fi
.PP
.B times
renvoie le nombre de tops d'horloge ecoules depuis
que le systeme a demarre.
.SH "CONFORME A"
SVID, AT&T, POSIX, X/OPEN, BSD 4.3
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR time "(1), " getrusage "(2), " wait (2)
