.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de)
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 12:53:43 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Traduction 15/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH UNAME 2 "15 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
uname \- Obtenir des informations a propos du noyau.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/utsname.h>
.sp
.BI "int uname(struct utsname *" buf );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B uname
renvoient les informations dans le buffer
.IR buf .
la structure 
.I utsname 
definie est dans /usr/include/sys/utsname.h comme suit :

.nf
struct utsname {
.in 22
char sysname[65];
char nodename[65];
char release[65];
char version[65];
char machine[65];
char domainname[65];
};
.in 10
.fi
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.B uname
renvoie 0 s'il reussit ou \-1 s'il echoue auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur.
.SH ERREURS
.TP 0.8i
.B EFAULT
.I buf
pointe en dehors de l'espace d'adressage accessible
.SH "CONFORME A"
SVID, AT&T, POSIX, X/OPEN
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR uname "(1), " getdomainname "(2), " gethostname (2)
