.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified 15 April 1995 by Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com):
.\"   Updated names and version numbers to Linux 1.2.4 / man-pages-1.6.
.\"   Moved unimplemented kernel calls to new man page.
.\"   Created new man page for obsolete calls, so don't talk about them here.
.\"   Removed BUGS as they've been fixed.
.\" Modified 10 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\" Modified 22 July 1995 by Michael Chastain (mec@duracef.shout.net):
.\"   Updated for Linux 1.3.6 / man-pages-1.7.
.\" aeb, 950825: all system calls have been documented!
.\" aeb, 960414: this is true again.
.\" "
.\" Traduction 15/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH UNDOCUMENTED 2 "15 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
Aucun ! \- Liste des appels systemes non documentes.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Avec Linux 1.3.88 il existe 163 appels systemes listes
dans
.IR /usr/include/asm/unistd.h .
Cette page mentionne les appels qui sont implementes dans le noyau
mais pas encore documentes dans le 
.IR "Manuel du programmeur Linux" .
Certains n'ont pas de prototype dans les fichiers d'en-tete de la libc.

.SH SOLICITATION
Si vous avez des informations a propos de ces appels systemes,
jetez un oeil aux sources du noyau, ecrivez une page de manuel 
(NDT : en anglais) avec un style similaire aux autres pages 
de la section 2, et envoyez-la a 
.B aeb@cwi.nl
pour qu'elle soit incluse dans le prochain release du manuel
du
Linux Documentation Project.

NDT : par la meme occasion envoyez-en une copie (en francais)
a 
.B ccb@club-internet.fr
.SH STATUS
"Undocumented" n'est pas un appel systeme...
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR obsolete "(2), " unimplemented "(2)"
