.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1995 Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com), 15 April 1995.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" 'ftime' is implemented as a library function.
.\" 'ulimit' is implemented as a library function.
.\"
.\" Traduction 16/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH UNIMPLEMENTED 2 "16 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
afs_syscall, break, gtty, lock, mpx, prof, quotactl, stty
\- Appels systemes non implementes.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Ces appels systemes ne sont pas implementes dans le noyau
Linux 1.2.4.

N.D.T. : Qu'en est\-il des noyaux 2.0 ?

.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
Tous ces appels systemes renvoient \-1 et
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur
.BR ENOSYS .
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR undocumented (2)
