.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Traduction 15/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH VM86 2 "15 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
vm86 \- Entrer en mode 8086 virtuel.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/vm86.h>
.sp
.BI "int vm86(struct vm86_struct * " info );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vm86
permet d'entrer en mode 8086 avec les informations
indiquees dans
.IR info :

.RS
.nf
struct vm86_struct {
        struct vm86_regs regs;
        unsigned long flags;
        unsigned long screen_bitmap;
};

struct vm86_regs {
/*
 * Les registres normaux, avec une signification particuliere
 * pour les descripteurs de segments.
 */
        long ebx;
        long ecx;
        long edx;
        long esi;
        long edi;
        long ebp;
        long eax;
        long __null_ds;
        long __null_es;
        long __null_fs;
        long __null_gs;
        long orig_eax;
        long eip;
        long cs;
        long eflags;
        long esp;
        long ss;
/*
 * Ceux-ci sont specifique au mode v86
 */
        long es;
        long ds;
        long fs;
        long gs;
};
.fi
.RE
.SH "VALEUR RENVOYEE"
.B vm86
renvoie 0 s'il reussit, ou \-1 s'il echoue auquel cas
.I errno
contient le code d'erreur
.SH ERREURS
.TP 0.8i
.B EPERM
Il existe une pile sauvegardee du noyau.


[Note du documenteur : Qu'est ce que ca implique ?]

[Note du traducteur : aucune idee ;-) ]

