.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de), Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\" 
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:00:12 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Traduction 18/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH NULL 4 "18 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel du programmeur Linux"
.SH NOM
null, zero \- Absorbeurs de donnees.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Les donnees ecrites sur un fichier special \fBnull\fP ou \fBzero\fP 
sont eliminees.
.PP
La lecture depuis un fichier special \fBnull\fP retourne toujours
"fin de fichier", alors que la lecture depuis \fBzero\fP retourne
toujours des caracteres \e0.
.LP
\fBnull\fP et \fBzero\fP sont typiquement crees ainsi :
.RS
.sp
mknod -m 666 /dev/null c 1 3
.br
mknod -m 666 /dev/zero c 1 5
.br
chown root.mem /dev/null /dev/zero
.sp
.RE
.SH NOTES
Si ces fichiers ne sont pas lisibles et accessibles en ecriture par
tous, de nombreux programmes vont se comporter etrangement.
.SH FICHIERS
/dev/null
.br
/dev/zero
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR mknod "(1), " chown (1)
