.\" 
.\"  Man page for the ncopy program
.\"
.TH NCOPY 1 17/03/1996 ncopy ncopy
.SH NAME
ncopy \- NetWare file copy

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ncopy -V

.B ncopy
[
.B -vn
]
[
.B -s
.I amount
]
.B file  destinationfile|directory

.B ncopy
[
.B -vn
]
[
.B -s
.I amount
]
.B file1 
[ 
.B file2 ...
] 
.B directory

.SH DESCRIPTION
With
.B ncopy
you can copy files to different locations on a single NetWare file 
server without generating excess network traffic.  The program uses
a NetWare function to do the copy rather than transferring the file
across the network for both the read and write.

If the last argument is a directory, 
.B ncopy
will copy the source file(s) into the directory.  If only two files
are given and the last argument is not a directory, it will copy the 
source file to the destination file.

If the source and destination files are not on the same NetWare server 
(or are not on NetWare servers at all),
.B ncopy
will do a normal file copy.
.SH OPTIONS
.B -V
.RS 3
Show version number and exit
.RE

.B -v
.RS 3
Verbose copy.  Will show current file and percentage completion.
.RE

.B -n
.RS 3
Nice NetWare copy.  Will sleep for a second between copying blocks on
the NetWare server.  Gives other people a chance to do some work on 
the NetWare server when you are copying large files.  This has no
effect if you are not copying on a NetWare server.
.RE

.B -s
.I amount
.RS 3
Nice time slice factor.  Used in conjunction with the 
.B -n
option, this specifies the number of 100K blocks to copy before sleeping.
Default is 10. (1 Megabyte)
.RE

.SH BUGS
.B ncopy
cannot recurse into directories.
Does not work on NetWare volumes mounted with the
.I -V
option to
.B ncpmount.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B ncpmount(8), ncpumount(8)

.SH CREDITS
ncopy was written by Brian G. Reid (breid@tim.com) and
Tom C. Henderson (thenderson@tim.com).
Many thanks to Volker Lendecke (lendecke@namu01.gwdg.de) for the ncpfs
and ncplib which made ncopy possible.
