.TH NSEND 1 03/21/1996 nsend nsend
.SH NAME
nsend \- Send messages to users
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nsend
[
.B -h
] [
.B -S
.I server
] [
.B -U
.I user name
] [
.B -P
.I password
 |
.B -n
] [
.B -C
] 
.I user message

.SH DESCRIPTION
With
.B nsend,
you can send messages to the user's workstations.

.B nsend
looks up the file
.I $HOME/.nwclient
to find a file server, a user name and possibly a password. See
nwclient(5) for more information. Please note that the access
permissions of .nwclient MUST be 600, for security reasons.

.SH OPTIONS

.B user
.RS 3
.B user
is the NetWare User-ID of the user to receive the message.
.RE

.B message
.RS 3
.B message
is the message to be sent. Please note that this has to be a single
command line argument. If you want to send a message that contains
spaces, you have to quote them on the command line. For example, to
annoy your system administrator, you should try

   nsend supervisor 'I know how this works!'
.RE

.B -S
.I server
.RS 3
.B server
is the name of the server you want to use.
.RE

.B -U
.I user name
.RS 3
If the user name your NetWare administrator gave to you differs
from your unix user-id, you should use
.B -U
to tell the server about you NetWare user name.
.RE

.B -P
.I password
.RS 3
You may want to give the password required by the server on the
command line. You should be careful to use passwords in scripts.
.RE

.B -n
.RS 3
.B -n
should be given to mount shares which do not require a password to log in.

If neither
.B -n
nor
.B -P
are given, nsend prompts for a password.
.RE

.B -C
.RS 3
By default, passwords are converted to uppercase before they are sent
to the server, because most servers require this. You can turn off
this conversion by
.B -C.
.RE

.SH BUGS
nsend only supports servers with up to 255 connections. I do not know
the NCP functions for larger servers. If anybody knows them, please
tell me!

.SH SEE ALSO
.B nwclient(5), nprint(1), slist(1), ncpmount(8), ncpumount(8)

.SH CREDITS
nsend was written by looking at mars_nwe's message handling. Thanks to
Martin Stover <mstover@freeway.de>
