.TH XMdb 1 "31 Mai 1996"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
XMdb \- X data base editor for
.I XPlaycd
cd databases.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xmdb
[
.B -display \<display\>
] [
.B -fn \<font\>
] [
.B -root \<path\>
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I XMdb
is an X-based program to maintain and edit databases created from within
.I XPlaycd.
It presents you with a list of all medias currently in the database
and lets you pick one for editing. You may create/delete new cathegories and
move items around.
.I XPlaycd
uses
.I XMdb
to add new entries to the database.

.SH "OPTIONS"
Options offered by
.I XMdb
are the following:
.TP 0.6i
.B -display \<display\>
Show the control window on the given display.
.TP 0.6i
.B -fn \<font\>
Use this font rather than the default. The given font should be about the
same size like the default font. If not, the window may look ugly.
.TP 0.6i
.B -root \<path\>
Use path as base for the cd database, overriding the *cddb resource.


.SH "RESOURCES"
.I XMdb
understands a large number of
.I X11
resources which are listed below. These system wide resources usually sit in
a file called
.B /usr/lib/X11/app-defaults/XMdb.
Personal resources reside either in 
.B ~/.Xdefaults
or
.B ~/.Xresources
depending on your installation. To put an
.I XMdb
resource into your personal resource file, prefix it with the word
.B xmdb.
After editing your personal file, be sure to run
.B xrdb ~/.Xresources
or
.B xrdb ~/.Xdefaults
to make them work. There is no need for a prefix or an invocation of
.I xrdb
if you change the system wide file.

.SH "STANDARD RESOURCES"
Standard
.I X11
resources with their defaults are shown here. For an explanation of the
standard resources please see the
.I X11
dcumentation.

Standard resources are:

.TP 0.6i
.B *title: XMdb
.TP 0.6i
.B *geometry: 312x300
.TP 0.6i
.B *iconic: off
.TP 0.6i
.B *background: gray80
.TP 0.6i
.B *foreground: black
.TP 0.6i
.B *font: -b&h-lucida-medium-r-normal-sans-*-120-*-*-p-*-*-*
.TP 0.6i
.B *reverseVideo: off
.TP 0.6i
.B *synchronize: off


.SH "SPECIAL RESOURCES"
Special
.I XMdb
resources are:

.TP 0.6i
.B *brightBorder: gray94
.TP 0.6i
.B *darkBorder: gray40
.TP 0.6i
.B *hilightColor: gray72
These settings are responsible for the 3D-look-and-feel of the program.
Just play with the values to see what they do.

.TP 0.6i
.B *cddb: (none)
The path where 
.I XMdb
expects the database. If this is not set,
.I XMdb
will report an error and use the current directory.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
xplaycd(1), xmixer(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Olav Woelfelschneider
   (wosch@rbg.informatik.th-darmstadt.de)

.SH COPYING
Copyright (C) 1994 - 1996
 Olav Woelfelschneider
 (wosch@rbg.informatik.th-darmstadt.de)

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
 This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
 You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

