This is my version of an IPX RIP/SAP daemon for Linux. For me, it
works very well with kernel 1.2.13 as well as 1.3.x kernels.

I hope this will eventually provide a stable, standard RIP/SAP daemon
for Linux. Currently (February '96) there is no such program that can
be called a standard one. All programs that I know of either require
kernel patches, do more than just RIP/SAP (such as mars_nwe), or
simply do not implement RIP and SAP correctly. Please forgive me if I
ignored the super ipx-rip/sap daemon I did not find.

I think this release provides some advantages over the other programs,
as it does not require a kernel patch, and it works fine when you
reconfigure your IPX interfaces while ipxd is running. With IPX over
PPP this should make remote access to IPX networks via Linux very
convenient.

Although ipxd does not require a kernel patch, it works fine with the
full internal network, which can be activated since Linux 1.3.60.

INSTALLATION

Simply type 'make' and, as root, 'make install'. This puts the program
ipxd into /usr/sbin/ and the manpages into /usr/man/man5 and
/usr/man/man8. 

To start ipxd automatically on system startup, you might want to put
the following lines somewhere into /etc/rc.d/rc.local:

if [ -f /usr/sbin/ipxd ]; then
  echo "Starting IPX RIP/SAP daemon"
  /usr/sbin/ipxd
fi

You might also want to copy the file ipx_ticks to /etc/ and change it
to reflect your environment.


NOTES

In the file ipx.diff there is a patch for 1.3 kernels that provides a
full internal net with several nodes, but without cross-routing of
packets to the so-called special sockets on the primary net. Sockets
bound on the internal net can request any node number they
like. Currently there's a lot of discussion about this topic on the
linware mailing list. 

Volker 

<lendecke@namu01.gwdg.de>


