
This directory and its subdirectories contains the OpenGL Utility
Toolkit (GLUT) distribution.  See the NOTICE for legal terms.

VERSION:

Release 3.3, January 22, 1997.

SUPPORTED MACHINES:

This distribution should compile for:

  o  DEC Alpha workstation running OSF/1 and OpenVMS with Open3D
     layered product.

  o  IBM RS/6000 workstations running AIX with OpenGL support.

  o  Metro Link's Metro OpenGL for Linux.

  o  SGI workstation running IRIX 5.2 or higher supporting OpenGL,
     including 64-bit and N32 support IRIX 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, and 6.4.

  o  Template Graphics Software's OpenGL for Sun workstations.

  o  Mesa 2.x (and 1.x) for Unix workstations, including Linux PCs
     and SunOS 4.1.x.

MAKEFILE GENERATION TO BUILD GLUT:     <-- IMPORTANT!

Use mkmkfiles.sgi to put Makefiles using the SGI Makefile conventions
in place.  Use mkmkfiles.imake to put Makefiles generated from
Imakefiles in place.  Run one of these two commands in this directory,
then do a "make".

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT GLUT:

See FAQ.glut

CONTENTS OVERVIEW BY DIRECTORY:

  GL - GLUT interface header files

  lib - source code for GLUT libraries

     glut - GLUT library implementation

     fglut - GLUT FORTRAN bindings (IRIX only)

     glut.n32 - IRIX 6.2 "N32" version of the GLUT library.

     fglut.n32 - IRIX 6.2 "N32" version of the GLUT library.

     glut.n64 - 64-bit version of the GLUT library.

     fglut.n64 - 64-bit version of the GLUT library.

  test - test programs for GLUT library

  progs - programs using GLUT

     examples - misc. GLUT examples

     redbook - examples from the OpenGL Programming Guide ported to GLUT

     advanced - GLUT examples demonstrating advanced OpenGL rendering
        techniques.  The programs are largely based on the SIGGRAPH '96
	course taught by David Blythe and Tom McReynolds.

     contrib - contributed GLUT examples

     demos - more involved OpenGL demos using GLUT

     fortran - GLUT FORTRAN examples

     glc - An example of using OpenGL's Character Rendering API
	included in IRIX 6.2 and beyond.

     inventor - Two GLUT-based Open Inventor examples.

     mesademos - Ports to GLUT of programs developed by Brian Paul
        that are distributed with Mesa.

DOCUMENTATION:

See the other README files in this directory.  There is a complete
specification for GLUT API version 3 in PostScript available by
anonymous ftp accompanying this distribution.  GLUT includes a full set
of nroff man pages for the GLUT API version 3.

ACCOMPANYING DATA FILES:

Another separate GLUT data distribution contains a "data" subdirectory
containing large data files used by some of the examples in the
"progs/advanced" subdirectory.  See the file "progs/advanced/README"
for more details.

A SHAMELESS BUT HOPEFULLY HELPFUL PLUG:

I've written a book titled "Programming OpenGL for the X Window System"
(ISBN: 0-201-48359-9) published by Addison-Wesley.  It includes both a
complete tutorial and documentation for GLUT, as well as a full
explanation of using OpenGL with the X Window System's Xlib and
Xt/Motif interfaces.  If you use GLUT, I believe you'll find this
book very informative.

BUG REPORTING:

Send bug reports by electronic mail to mjk@sgi.com

Questions of a general interest about GLUT will be answered on the
comp.graphics.api.opengl newsgroup.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS:

Much thanks to OpenGL engineers at DEC, IBM, Microsoft, SGI, Sun, and
TGS.  Of particular mention are Brian Paul from the University of
Wisconsin, Nate Robbins at the Univeristy of Utah, and Craig Groeschel
of Metro Link Inc. for helping me ensure the portability of this code
to non-SGI graphics platforms.  Also thank you to GLUT users who
supplied me with feedback and bug fixes.

- Mark Kilgard
  mjk@sgi.com
