.\" (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:35:54 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.TH FNMATCH 3  "April 19, 1993" "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
fnmatch \- match filename or pathname
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <fnmatch.h>
.sp
.BI "int fnmatch(const char *" "pattern" ", const char *" strings ", int "flags ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B fnmatch()
checks the
.I strings
argument and checks if it matches
.I pattern
argument, which is a shell wildcard pattern.
.PP
The
.I flags
argument modifies the behaviour; it is the bitwise OR of zero or more
of the following flags:
.TP
.B FNM_NOESCAPE
If this flag is set, treat backslash as an ordinary character,
instead of an escape character.
.TP
.B FNM_PATHNAME
If this flag is set, match a slash in
.I string
only with a slash in
.I pattern
and not, for example, with a [] \- sequence containing a slash.
.TP
.B FNM_PERIOD
If flag this is set, a leading period in
.I string
has to be matched exactly by a period in
.IR pattern .
A period is considered to be leading if it is the first character in
.IR string ,
or if both
.B FNM_PATHNAME 
is set and the period immediately follows a slash.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
Zero if
.I string
matches
.IR pattern ,
.B FNM_NOMATCH
if there is no match or another value if there is an error.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
proposed POSIX.2
.SH BUGS
POSIX.2 is not yet an approved standard; the information in this
manpage is subject to change.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR sh "(1), " glob "(3), " glob (7)
