.\" Copyright (C), 1994, Graeme W. Wilford. (Wilf.)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Thu Jul 29 00:51:03 BST 1994 Wilf. (G.Wilford@ee.surrey.ac.uk) 
.\"
.TH REALPATH 3  "July 29th 1994" "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
realpath \- returns the canonicalized absolute pathname.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/param.h>
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "char *realpath(char *" path ", char " resolved_path[] ); 
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B realpath
expands all symbolic links and resolves references
to
.IR '/./' ", " '/../' 
and extra 
.I '/' 
characters in the null terminated string named by 
.I path
and stores the canonicalized absolute pathname in the buffer of size
.B MAXPATHLEN
named by
.IR resolved_path .
The resulting path will have no symbolic link,
.I '/./'
or
.I '/../'
components.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
If there is no error, it returns a pointer to the
.IR resolved_path .

Otherwise it returns a NULL pointer and places in
.I resolved_path  
the absolute pathname of the 
.I path 
component
which could not be resolved. The global variable
.I errno 
is set to indicate the error. 
.SH ERRORS
.TP 0.8i
.B ENOTDIR
A component of the path prefix is not a directory.
.TP
.B EINVAL
The pathname contains a character with the high-order bit set.
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
A component of a pathname exceeded 
.B MAXNAMLEN
characters,
or an entire path name exceeded 
.B MAXPATHLEN
characters.
.TP
.B ENOENT
The named file does not exist.
.TP
.B EACCES
Search permission is denied for a component of the path prefix.
.TP
.B ELOOP
Too many symbolic links were encountered in translating the pathname.
.TP
.B EIO
An I/O error occurred while reading from the file system.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR readlink "(2), " getcwd (3) 
