.\" I really don't like to write man pages.
.ds ]W Pente 2.1.10
.TH Pente 6 "29 October 1995"
.SH NAME
pente \- Game of five in a row
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
.B pente -help
.LP
.B pente
[
.I <options>
]
.SH HOW TO PLAY PENTE
Pente is the American name of a Japanese game called ``ni-nuki'',
which is a variant of the ancient game ``go-moku''.  Pente is played
on a 19x19 grid with stones of two different colors. 
Each player chooses one set of stones; then the players take turns
placing their stones on any unoccupied intersection until one player
wins.
.LP
There are two ways to win.  If a player makes five
or more stones in a straight line (across, down, or diagonally), then
that player wins.  Or, if a player captures five pairs of his or her
opponent's stones, that player also wins.
.LP
Stones may be captured in pairs only.  To capture
a pair of stones, a player must place one stone on either side of the
pair.
.LP
The first move is placed in the center of the board.  To make up for the
advantage of going first, the first player's second move must be at least
three spaces from their first.  This sounds confusing, so don't worry
about it; just play, and if the computer won't let you move where you
want on your second move, play somewhere farther away.
.LP
That's it!  There directions are pretty terse, but if you have an X display
there are better directions available through the ``help'' button.  You can
also try playing a few games; the rules are simple enough that you can pick
them up easily just by playing.
.SH THE PROGRAM
This program has support for many different display types.  Depending on
the compile options used, X Windows, Curses, and a plain text format
may be available.  The exact display type used will be chosen by the program,
or it may be selected with a command line switch.  Information on the
switches is available with
.B pente
.BR \-help .
.LP
Most of the command line switches can also be set with the ``setup'' window
of the X interface.  Any changes you make there will be saved in the
.B .pente.ad
file and remembered the next time that you play.
.LP
You can also set any of the command line switches can be set with an X
default.  For example, if you want to set black and white to be the default
mode, you can run pente with 
.B pente
.BR -nocolor ,
or you can add 
.B pente*color: 0
to your X defaults, or you can just turn off color in the ``setup'' window.
.LP
Pente will store a new
.B .pente.ad
file every time you run it.  In this file it will save the current state of
Pente.  This is handy; you don't normally have to set command line switches
since Pente will remember them in the
.B .pente.ad
file.
.SH BUGS
Sometimes the
.B .pente.ad
file gets some bad data in it.  Just delete the file and then
you can start from scratch again.
.SH AUTHOR
Bill Shubert (wms@hevanet.com)
.LP
French text by Eric Dupas (dupas@univ-mlv.fr)
