@chapter Hints

@section How do I rebuild a package ?

Here's a worked example for rebuilding the fileutils,
assuming that you have the same directory structure
as I do on your NT box.. 

@example
mkdir /src
cd /src
cp /a/win32/orig/fileutils-3.12.tar.gz .
cp /a/win32/orig/fileutils-3.12.diff.gz .
tar zxf fileutils-3.12.tar.gz
cd fileutils-3.12
zcat ../fileutils-3.12.diff.gz | patch
configure
make
@end example
[ you may need to touch all the files before you make if your times
are out of sync ]

Here's how to rebuild the base tools.

@example
mkdir /src
cd src
tar zxf /home/ftp/pub/sac/gnu-win32/src/comptools.tar.gz
tar zxf /home/ftp/pub/sac/gnu-win32/src/gcc.tar.gz
tar zxf /home/ftp/pub/sac/gnu-win32/src/libs.tar.gz
./configure --disable-gdbtk
make

@end example

@section How do you get files to your NT box ?

My NT box has a local FAT partition, I don't use NTFS, but I have enabled long names.
I export a partition from my Linux box using samba, and mount that on the NT box.
For toying around I can run the win32 apps on the NT box on the mounted Linux
partition.  For initial testing the release I xcopy /s from the samba mount onto the NT
box's FAT partition. 

@section What are some other sites with stuff ?

@table @code
@item Perl
 is in @file{ftp://dns.ufsia.ac.be/pub/perl}
@item emacs
 is in @file{http://www.cs.washington.edu/homes/voelker/ntemacs.html}
@end table

@section demo

Extract the demo somewhere, make sure that you have unpacked the binaries
into /usr (or somewhere else) and that /usr/bin is in your path. (You'll
need a sh.exe in /bin for some other stuff too)

Then move to the demo directory and type make.

eg.
@example
        SET PATH=c:\usr\bin;\bin;.
        SET HOME=/home/sac
        bash#
        bash# cd /usr/demo
	bash# make
@end example
To make the V demo (assuming you downloaded all.zip or v.zip)

@example
        bash# make -f vdemo.mak
@end example

