@chapter History
@itemize @code



@item RELEASE-14 10-apr-96

Some bugs have been fixed.  GDBM and m4 are in the release.  GCC now uses the standard
install directories for cc1 etc.  

A port of V to gnu-win32 is included.  You can now write graphics applications
which will run on Unix or Windows unchanged.  Some parts of V work on the PPC too.

If you call any programs from the standard DOS shell, then the DLL will expand
all the wildcards (glob) found in the arguments on the command line. 
So ls *.exe will do what you think it should, even if you're not in bash.

ncurses and less are included. The DLL's emulation of a vt100 isn't complete,
so ncurses doesn't do all that it should. Hence less is more or less useless.  This
can be fixed with a new DLL.  (If you want to use something which uses curses,
be sure to set your TERM and HOME envirionment variables)

If you leave out main, then the libraries will try and call WinMain in the
usual way.

^C works much better on Windows 95.  It's still not quite right, but at
least most times it quits what you're doing, and most times doesn't
crash your machine.

You can start more than one concurrent bash session. 

Some networking support has been added.  Even though telnet.exe is provided,
I know that it doesn't work, so please don't send me bug reports.

You will have to relink your applications to go with the new DLL.

The DLL is released in its own .zip file too, so you don't have to
download a load of other stuff if you dont want to.


@item RELEASE-13 9-feb-96

You can change the default file mode from the registry.
Two resource tools included.
You can use filenames with the same spelling but
different case.
Nasty bash hanging bug fixed.
PowerPC tools released too.
You can get to raw floppy disks.

@item RELEASE-12 4-jan-96

You can call non- gnu-win32 applications from bash.
You can mount other directories using the @code{mount} command.
Minimal ANSI terminal emulation included.
Packages split into smaller and more logical lumps.
/d<name> mechanism gone.

@item RELEASE-11

Something broke on the way to the ftp site.

@item RELEASE-10

You can pass environment variables around in bash.
Lots more stuff provided precompiled.
Diffs to standard FSF release provided.
It self hosts.
It supports symbolic links.
The directory layout has changed to be more unix like.
The way that you get to non-c drives is new - i:\foo.cc
is now /di/foo.cc

Nasty bug found and fixed in fork.  CPP will now
search the directories you supply in env names.

@item RELEASE-9:

I've put all of libc and libm into a shared library,
This drastically reduces the size of some binaries.
eg, ls goes from 82,949 bytes to 26,624.
"Hello World" is 2564 bytes long.
This is the first stage in greatly speeding up 
some of the stuff that's going on behind the curtain.

Different processes communicate using shared memory.

Some trivial use of the registry is made.

DLLTOOL is now *much* faster.

Some small problems have been fixed in the way that DLLs were
layed out.	

@item RELEASE-8

GDB works.

GCC now emits debug info which can make **huge** executables
Fortunately, strip works too.
More work has been done to make quoting work.
Simple termios support added to newlib.
Much nicer way of describing paths, eg //c/foo is c:\foo.

@item RELEASE-7

Works again on Win 95 (which is why -6 wasn't advertised)
Permissions are faked better.
Source of demos available without having to ftp
the entire win32 binary tree. 

@item RELEASE-6

Can now generate DLLs, tiny demo included.
tcl, byacc, fileutils, diff, make included.

@item RELEASE-5

Bug preventing anything from running on recent versions
of Win95 fixed.

vfork and exec oddities fixed.

Import libraries are now really libraries and not
just .o files.

Debugging info stripped from images and libraries;
it's just bloat until gdb works.

I've filled in the four major import libraries.

The win*.h files are now installed into <foo>/include
rather that <foo>/include/sys, so more things will
compile out of the box.

@item RELEASE-4

PE support is fixed. Programs run on
NT 3.1, NT 3.5, NT 3.51 and Windows 95.

You can build GUI programs.

.DEF files for three other DLL's started.

New GUI demo program. 

C library distinguishes between text and binary files
consequently the text files generated by the
tools have the familiar ^M at the end of the line
which DOS likes so much.

Doug Evans of Cygnus has added a load
of fancy support for execve, opendir and 
various other cool things.

Exception handling is better.


@item RELEASE-3
Was so long ago I don't remember.

@end itemize
