\input texinfo 
@chapter Release notes for RELEASE-B15
@setfilename readme.txt

You can find a link to the most recent release in
files in @file{ftp://ftp.cygnus.com/pub/sac/win32}

@section Important changes:

@subsection In B15

This is a bug fix release.

A bug where DOS prompt wildcard matching only one file is fixed didn't match
anything is fixed.

& works in bash again.

PowerPC GCC works properly.

V is upgraded to v1.09.

Linker abort bug fixed.

Less and ncurses are out.

@section Installation

Unpack the parts you want onto your machine.  I put my
tree into @code{/usr/...}, so most of the binaries live in @code{/usr/bin},
the include files are in @code{/usr/include} etc etc.

The minimal installation has at least the libs package in it (that has
the DLL which all the binaries use).  To do development, you'll need
@code{comptools.zip}, @code{libs.zip} and @code{gcc.zip}.

For bash, you'll need to create a directory called @code{/tmp}, and put
a copy of @code{bash.exe} into @code{/bin/sh.exe} and
@code{/usr/bin/sh.exe}.

With the new mount facility, you can put your @code{/tmp} or @code{/usr/bin}
or whatever on some other machine or disk, so you won't clutter
up your @code{C:} drive unless you want to.

Be careful to delete any old copies of the binaries or the
@code{CYGWIN.DLL}.  Having different versions of the application and the
DLL can cause a large amount of pain.  Guess how I know.

If you install into a non-standard place, or want to use C++, you'll have
to set some environment variables.

First make sure that the binaries are in your path.  You may also need
to set @code{C_INCLUDE_PATH} or @code{CPLUS_INCLUDE_PATH}.  You will
need to set @code{LIBRARY_PATH}.

Set them on the DOS command line with the DOS convention.  The tools
automatically turn the DOS stuff into unix stuff internally.



@section Contents

This release contains:

	A proto faq.

	C library in a DLL.

	The GNU shell: bash.

	The GNU debugger: gdb.

	The GNU binutils: size, ranlib, nm, ar, strip, dlltool, objcopy, objdump.

	The GNU assembler: gas.	

	The GNU fileutils: ls, mkdir, rmdir, dd etc etc	

	The GNU findutils: find, etc

	The GNU textutils: cat, head, tail etc etc

	The GNU shellutils: true, uname etc etc

        GNU m4

        GNU dbm

        Some net stuff: ftp and finger.

	GNU bison

	GNU diff

	GNU make

	The GNU C, C++ and Objective C compiler, gcc.

	Standard C++ library and include files.

	STL headers included.

	ANSI C library and include files, with some Posix extensions

	IO streams library and include files.

	Complete libraries for kernel32.dll, advapi32.dll,
	gdi32.dll and user32.dll, version.dll

	Not quite so complete header files describing them.

	Some tiny demo programs.

	Tool for building DLLs.

        A port of V.



@section Release directory structure

files in @file{ftp://ftp.cygnus.com/pub/sac/win32}

@example
        src/*.tar.gz            Sources to the packages.
        src/*.diff.gz           Diffs needed to build the packages.
        i386/*.zip              Binaries for the i386
        ppc/*.zip               Binaries for the PowerPC
@end example

All the binaries and the source used to build the binaries
are provided.  If the source comes from a 'standard net release' then
it is provided as a copy of the release tar.gz file and a set of
diffs against the release.  If the source is part of some internal
Cygnus development effort, then just the tree is there.  (There are
probably releases out there which could be used to provide diffs against,
but it's much easier for me to just dump what I've got).

I bundle each package I get from the net into its own installed binary
tree, so you should be able to install only what you want by unpacking it from your
machine's root directory.

The binaries are in two subdirectories, @code{ppc} and @code{i386}.  In
each of those directories, the file @code{all.zip} contains @emph{all}
the other .zip files.  Note the PowerPC binaries are much larger because
they contain debugging information and are not optimized.

@include packagelist.texinfo

@chapter Cygnus resources online.

The www homepage is:

	http://www.cygnus.com/misc/gnu-win32/

Mailing list archives (indexed by Hypermail, the first message is from
mid-August) are available at

	http://www.cygnus.com/ml/gnu-win32/

All the documentation is on line at

http://www.cygnus.com/library-dir.html


