=head1 NAME

xmp - extended module player

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xmp>
[B<-8ADhiLlmnorVvx>]
[B<-d> I<device>]
[B<-M> I<ch>]
[B<-p> I<pan>]
[B<-S> I<ch>]
[B<-s> I<pos>]
I<modules>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xmp> is a module player originally designed to play Fasttracker II
extended modules. The current version recognizes Fasttracker II modules
(XM), 1 to 32 channel Protracker modules (MOD) and variants (including
Mod's Grave WOW modules), Scream Tracker 3 modules (S3M), Scream Tracker 2
modules (STM), Composer 669 and UNIS669 modules (669), Poly Tracker modules
(PTM), Oktalyzer modules (OKT) and Multitracker modules (MTM). Currently
supported output devices are the Gravis Ultrasound (or SoftOSS) and the
Sound Blaster AWE-32. Software mixer support is NOT implemented in this
version.


=head1 OPTIONS

=over 8

=item B<-8>

Convert 16-bit samples to 8-bit (to save memory in the sound device).

=item B<-A>

Use Amiga (exponential) period mode. This is the default mode.

=item B<-D>

Dump the pattern data to stdout (for debugging).

=item B<-d> I<device>

Uses the specified device for output overriding autodetection. Use this
option if you have more than one output device in your system (e.g. force
softmix in a GUS). If B<-d> is not used, xmp will use the first available
device for output. Devices are probed in the order shown in the device
list.

=item B<-h>

Show a short summary of command-line options.

=item B<-i>

Ignore 0xff (end of module marker) when playing S3M files. Not very useful
unless you're playing music from the Unreal demo.

=item B<-L>

Use linear period mode, according to the XM specs (period = 7680 - note<<6
- finetune>>1).

=item B<-l>

Enable module looping.

=item B<-M> ch

Mute the specified channel.

=item B<-m>

Force mono output.

=item B<-n>

Force NTSC (60 Hz) timing for MOD files. Default is PAL (50 Hz).

=item B<-p> I<num>

Set the percentual panning amplitude. The default value is 75%.

=item B<-r>

Reverse left/right stereo output channels.

=item B<-S> ch

Play only the specified channel (solo).

=item B<-s> I<pos>

Start playing the module from the position I<pos>.

=item B<-V>

Print version information.

=item B<-v>

Verbose mode (incremental).

=back

=head1 SIGNALS

If B<xmp> receives SIGABRT, it will abort the currently playing module and
start the next module specified in the command line. If SIGUSR1 is received,
B<xmp> will reload the currently playing module.

=head1 CAVEATS

See the file B<README.formats> in the distribution package for a complete
list of restrictions for each supported module format.

=head1 BUGS

=over 4

=item *

Note slide effects not supported.

=item *

XM effects K, L and T not supported.

=item *

UNIS 669 extended effects not supported.

=item *

FAR support is poor.

=back

See the file B<README.bugs> in the distribution package for a detailed
list of bugs in the current release. 

=head1 AUTHOR

B<xmp> was written by C Matsuoka <claudio@cpgei.cefetpr.br> and H Carraro Jr
(no current email address). AWE/awedrv support added by Takashi Iwai
<iwai@dragon.mm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

=head1 DISCLAIMER

This is a free product with no warranty of any kind. Use it at your own risk.

