.TH CLIENTS 5 "21 June 1995"
.SH NAME
clients \- \s-2RADIUS\s+2 client to shared-secret mapping file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ../raddb/clients
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
The
.I clients
file resides in the
.I ../raddb
directory.  It contains a list of \s-2RADIUS\s+2 clients and servers
(or pairs of same).
Comments are indicated by leading pound sign
.RB (' # ')
characters.
.LP
All such comment lines are ignored (as are blank lines).
The file contains a line of information for each such client or server.
Each line has three, white-space delimited fields.
Each line has the following of the form:
.IP
.I <system-name> "     <key>"    "          <user/authfile prefix>"
.LP
For example:
.IP
.ft B
merit.edu           notsosecure
.LP
The
.I <system-name>
field may be an \s-2IP\s+2 address (in dotted-quad notation) or a valid
Domain Name System (\s-2DNS\s+2) hostname.
A pair of \s-2RADIUS\s+2 clients or servers may be specified with the
following alternate notation:
.TP
.I "           name1/name2"
.LP
This allows the same clients file to be used by and distributed to different
\s-2RADIUS\s+2 servers.
A request from a \s-2RADIUS\s+2 client or server will match such an entry
only if the source \s-2IP\s+2 address matches the \s-2IP\s+2 address of
.I name1
.B or
.IR name2 .
.LP
The
.I <key>
field is the encryption key or "shared secret" held between a \s-2RADIUS\s+2
server and a client or between two \s-2RADIUS\s+2 servers.
It is currently limited to a maximum of fifteen characters in length.
.LP
The
.I "<user/authfile prefix>"
field specifies a text string prefix which may be used to select different
.I users
or 
.I authfile
files for requests from the associated system.
This feature allows for different \s-2NAS\s+2es to share the same
\s-2RADIUS\s+2 server but use different authentication databases.
.LP
The
.I clients
file information is read by
.B radiusd
upon startup, or when a \s-2HUP\s+2 signal is received by
.BR radiusd .
The \s-2RADIUS\s+2 server detects any out-of-date configuration files
upon receipt of a Status-Server (or Management-Poll) request and re-reads
all the configuration files.
This file is maintained by the \s-2RADIUS\s+2 administrator using a text editor.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP
.I ../raddb/authfile
.TP
.I ../raddb/clients
.TP
.I ../raddb/users
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR signal (3),
.BR radiusd (8),
.BR radcheck (8),
.BR radpwtst (8),
.BR authfile (5),
.BR users (5)
