.TH DICTIONARY 5 "15 June 1995"
.SH NAME
dictionary \- dictionary translations for parsing \s-2RADIUS\s+2 requests
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ../raddb/dictionary
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
The
.I dictionary
file resides in the
.I ../raddb
directory.  It contains a list of dictionary translations which \s-2RADIUS\s+2
will use to parse incoming requests and to generate outgoing responses.
Comments are indicated by leading pound sign
.RB (' # ')
characters.
All such comment lines are ignored (as are blank lines).
.LP
All transactions are composed of Attribute/Value Pairs.
The value of each attribute is specified as one of four data
.IR <type> s.
.LP
Valid
.I <types>
include:
.PD 0
.IP
.BR string "   \- \s-20\-253\s+2 octets"
.IP
.BR ipaddr "  \- \s-24\s+2 octets in network byte order"
.IP
.BR integer "  \- \s-232\s+2 bit value in big endian order (high byte first)"
.IP
.BR date "     \- \s-232\s+2 bit value in big endian order \- seconds since \s-200:00:00 GMT,  J\s+2an.  \s-21,  1970\s+2"
.sp
.LP
The \s-2ATTRIBUTE\s+2 entries consist of four fields:
.IP
.I "       \s-2ATTRIBUTE\s+2" "   <attribute-name>" "   <integer-encoding>" "   <type>"
.sp
.LP
The \s-2VALUE\s+2 entries consist of four fields:
.IP
.I "       \s-2VALUE\s+2" "        <attribute-name>" "    <value-name>" "         <integer-encoding>"
.sp
.LP
For example:
.IP
.ft B
\s-2ATTRIBUTE\s+2       \s-2F\s+2ramed-\s-2P\s+2rotocol         \s-27\s+2       integer
.LP
and
.IP
.ft B
\s-2VALUE\s+2             \s-2F\s+2ramed-\s-2P\s+2rotocol         \s-2PPP\s+2    \s-21\s+2
.sp
.LP
The
.I dictionary
file is read by
.B radius
at startup and whenever a \s-2HUP\s+2 signal is received by
.BR radius .
The \s-2RADIUS\s+2 server detects any out-of-date configuration files
upon receipt of a Status-Server (or Management-Poll) request and re-reads
all the configuration files.
This file is maintained by the \s-2RADIUS\s+2 administrator using a text editor.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP
.I ../raddb/dictionary
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR signal (3),
.BR radiusd (8),
.BR radcheck (8),
.BR radpwtst (8)
