.TH USERS 5 "21 June 1995"
.SH NAME
users \- \s-2RADIUS\s+2 user security and configuration file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ../raddb/users
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
The
.I users
file resides in the
.I ../raddb
directory.  It contains a list of users which \s-2RADIUS\s+2 will use
during authentication.
Comments are indicated by leading pound sign
.RB (' # ')
characters.
All such comment lines are ignored (as are blank lines).
.LP
The file contains one or more lines of information for each such user.
The first line of each entry consists of one or more fields:
.IP
.I "<users-name>" " <check-item>" " [, <check-item>]" " ..."
.LP
For example:
.IP
.ft B
george   \s-2P\s+2assword = foobar
.LP
There are three special user names,
.IR \s-2DEFAULT\s+2 ,
.IR dumbuser ,
.IR pppuser " and"
.IR slipuser ,
which are used as the default entry for user names which do not match any
previous entries, to hold non-framed
.IR reply-items ,
\s-2PPP\s+2
.IR reply-items ,
and \s-2SLIP\s+2
.IR reply-items ,
respectively.
These latter three entries allow a user to connect to the Network Access
Server (\s-2NAS\s+2) while using the same user name for any of the framed
or non-framed protocols.
The \s-2DEFAULT\s+2 entry specifies how user names, not explicitly matched
above it in this file, are to be authenticated.
.LP
Additional lines, beginning with leading whitespace, following the
first line above, indicate the (Attribute/Value Pairs) reply items to
be passed back to the \s-2RADIUS\s+2 client to allow the initiation of a
user session.
These may include things like \s-2PPP\s+2 configuration values, the name
of the host to which the user wishes to connect or an optoinal packet
filter name.
Attribute/Value Pair names must be defined in the
.I dictionary
file.
.LP
These additional lines consist of one or more fields:
.IP
.I "<whitespace>" " <reply-item>," " [<reply-item>,]" " ..."
.LP
For example:
.IP
.ft B
<\s-2TAB\s+2>   \s-2F\s+2ramed-\s-2P\s+2rotocol = \s-2PPP\s+2,
.LP
Note that the first line of each entry does \s-2NOT\s+2 end with a comma
.RB (' , ')
character while the
.I reply-item
lines of each entry begin with a \s-2TAB\s+2 or space character
and end with a comma character, except for the final
.I reply-item
of each entry, which omits the trailing comma.
.LP
The
.I users
file is optionally read into internal tables by
.B radiusd
at startup and whenever a \s-2HUP\s+2 signal is received by
.BR radiusd .
The \s-2RADIUS\s+2 server detects any out-of-date configuration files
upon receipt of a Status-Server (or Management-Poll) request and re-reads
all the configuration files.
The
.I users
file may be converted into a
.BR dbm (3)
database by using the
.BR builddbm (8)
utility.
This file is maintained by the \s-2RADIUS\s+2 administrator using a text editor.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 20
.I ../raddb/dictionary
the file describing the possible Attribute/Value Pairs.
.TP 20
.I ../raddb/users
this file.
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dbm (3),
.BR signal (3),
.BR dictionary (5),
.BR builddbm (8),
.BR radiusd (8),
.BR radcheck (8),
.BR radpwtst (8)
