This is fvwm-2.0.42 hacked for a look and feel similar to Windows-95. 

The installation process is more or less the same as for the standard
fvwm2, the only difference is that the program name will be fvwm95-2, and
the modules will be copied to /usr/X11R6/lib/X11/fvwm95-2. Refer to the
file INSTALL for more details. 

I also have included a hacked version of the Win95WinList module from
David Barth (original from Mike Finger), whichs looks very close to the
Windows-95 task bar. There is a clock and incoming mail indicator on it,
it can also swallow other modules. The module is named FvwmTaskBar, for
more information read the README file in the modules/FvwmTaskBar
directory. See also http://ltiwww.epfl.ch/~barth

For best results, use the supplied example.fvwm2rc95 as your initial
.fvwm2rc95 file, and customize it as necessary. I have tried to use the
same colors as in Windows-95, as well as similar-looking fonts for the
title bar and menus. Basically, the format used in the file is the same as
in the standard .fvwm2rc, with some minor differences and additional
commands, they are briefly explained in the example file. 

I have included in the directory mini-icons some 16x14 pixmaps that can be
used for the menus (the example.fvwm2rc95 uses some of them). All they
together use no more than 8 colors, and they look best over a light gray
background (such the #c0c0c0 used in the example configuration). You have
to move them manually to /usr/local/mini-icons or some other directory,
and update the PixmapPath setting in the .fvwm2rc95


Enjoy!
Hector Peraza.
peraza@mitac11.uia.ac.be
peraza@uia.ua.ac.be

We have already a Fvwm-95 home page. Point your browser to 
http://ltiwww.epfl.ch/~barth/fvwm95.html, there we will announce any 
changes, new add-ons, or bug corrections.

Please, do not send fvwm95 specific questions to the fvwm mailing list or
to the fvwm mantainer (Charles Hines, chuck_hines@vnet.ibm.com). If you
have any fvwm95-related questions, problems or suggestions feel free to
contact me at the above specified addresses. 

