.\"/***********************************************************
.\" 	Copyright 1989 by Carnegie Mellon University
.\" 
.\"                       All Rights Reserved
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its 
.\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, 
.\" provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
.\" both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in 
.\" supporting documentation, and that the name of CMU not be
.\" used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
.\" software without specific, written prior permission.  
.\" 
.\" CMU DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" CMU BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR
.\" ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION,
.\" ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE.
.\" ******************************************************************/
.TH SNMPD 8 "July 1996"
.SH NAME
snmpd - cmu's snmp agent for Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
snmpd [-p <port>] [-v] [-d] [-f] [-c <configfile>] [-a <agentboots>]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Snmpd should be run as a daemon in background. It is serving to your
pleasure and answering snmp V1 and V2usec requests.
.br 
Upon startup /etc/snmpd.conf is read (if it exists).
.br
Successful set-requests of system.sysName, system.sysLocation and
system.sysContact are stored in
.B "snmpd.conf(5)",
if this files exists.
.br
With the default configuration the daemon answers all V1 requests with
the ``public'' community string, except for host.hrSWRun* requests,
for security reasons and the configured V2usec requests.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "-v"
Be verbose upon startup.
.TP
.B "-d"
Dump snmp-packets to stdout. Useful for debugging only.
.TP
.B "-f"
Fork away and run in background. This option launches a snmpd demon
running in the background and lets the command return immedeately.
You would normally use this at bootime, eg. in /etc/rc.local as
.nf
       /usr/sbin/snmpd -f  ;  echo 'snmpd'
.fi
.TP
.BI "-c <configfile>"
complete filename of the snmpd configuration file. The default is
.B "/etc/snmpd.conf" .
.TP
.BI "-a <agentinfo>"
complete filename of the snmpd's agentinfo file. it contains the numer
of agentboots. The default is
.B "/etc/snmpd.agentinfo" .
.SH ENVORONMENT
MIBFILE - complete filename of mib.txt (this defaults to /usr/lib/mib.txt
and a /etc/mib.txt is also found).
.SH FILES
/etc/snmpd.conf - configuration file of the agent
.br
/etc/snmpd.agentinfo - storage file for agent reboot info
.br
/usr/lib/mib.txt - MIB database
.SH "SEE ALSO"
snmpd.conf(5), variables(5)
.SH BUGS
Setting routing entries does not work (the cmu-code hits you hard).
.SH AUTHOR
Changes and add-on's for the Linux port, the host resources
enhancement and ident enhancement are added by Erik Schoenfelder
(schoenfr@gaertner.de), the Linux MIB, many ideas, suggestions and
help by Juergen Schoenwaelder (schoenw@cs.utwente.nl).
