.\*/***********************************************************
.\" 	Copyright 1988, 1989 by Carnegie Mellon University
.\" 
.\"                       All Rights Reserved
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its 
.\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, 
.\" provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
.\" both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in 
.\" supporting documentation, and that the name of CMU not be
.\" used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
.\" software without specific, written prior permission.  
.\" 
.\" CMU DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" CMU BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR
.\" ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION,
.\" ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE.
.\" ******************************************************************/
.TH SNMPTEST 1 "17 September 1989"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
snmptest - communicates with a network entity using SNMP GET Requests.
.SH SYNOPSIS
snmptest host community
.SH DESCRIPTION
Snmptest is a flexible SNMP application that can monitor and manage
information on a network entity.
.PP
The
.I host
specification may be either a host name or an internet address
specified in "dot notation"
.PP
The
.I community
specifies the community name for the transaction with the remote system.
.PP
After invoking the program, a command line
interpreter proceeds to accept commands.  It will prompt with:
.PP
.I Please enter the variable name:
.PP
At this point you can enter one or more variable names, one per line.
A blank line is a command to send a request for each of the variables (in a single
packet) to the remote entity. Each variable name is given in the format specified in
.IR variables (5).
For example
.PP
.I snmpget netdev-kbox.cc.cmu.edu public
.br
.I Please enter the variable name: system.sysdescr.0
.br
.I Please enter the variable name: 
.PP
Will return some information about the request and reply packets, as well as the
information:
.PP
.I Name: system.sysDescr.0
.br
.I OCTET STRING- (ascii):	Kinetics FastPath2
.PP
Upon startup, the program defaults to sending a GET Request packet.  This can be changed
to a GET NEXT Request or a SET Request by typing the commands "$N" or "$S" repectively.  Typing
"$G" will go back to the GET Request mode.
.PP
The command "$D" will toggle the dumping of each sent and received packet.
.PP
When in the "SET Request" mode, more information is requested by the prompt for each variable.  The prompt:
.PP
.I Please enter variable type [i|s|n]: 
.PP
requests the type of the variable be entered.  Type "i" for an integer, "s" for an octet string,
and "n" for a null value.
.br
At this point a value will be prompted for:
.PP
.I Please enter new value: 
.PP
If this is an integer value, just type the integer (in decimal).  If it is a string, type in
white-space seperated decimal numbers, one per byte of the string.  Again type a blank line at
the prompt for the variable name to send the packet.
.PP
At the variable name line, typing "$Q" will quit the program.
.PP
Adding a "-d" to the argument list will cause the application to dump input and output packets.
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
variables(5), RFC 1065, RFC 1066, RFC 1067
