.\"/***********************************************************
.\" 	Copyright 1989 by Carnegie Mellon University
.\" 
.\"                       All Rights Reserved
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its 
.\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, 
.\" provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
.\" both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in 
.\" supporting documentation, and that the name of CMU not be
.\" used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
.\" software without specific, written prior permission.  
.\" 
.\" CMU DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" CMU BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR
.\" ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION,
.\" ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE.
.\" ******************************************************************/
.TH SNMPD.CONF 5 "July 1996"
.SH NAME
snmpd.conf - configuration file for cmu snmpd
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B "/etc/snmpd.conf"
is read on startup by 
.B "snmpd(8)"

.br
This file has two parts. The first part is related to the view, user
and community configuration for snmp V2-usec. 

The second part is for the Linux port and allows to set additional
configuration items:

The Linux specific part consists of lines containing a
.B "<key>"
followed by a 
.B ":"
and a 
.B "<value>".
.br
Lines beginning with a
.B "#"
and empty lines are ignored.
.br

The recognized key and value pairs are as follows:
.TP
.B "port"
The port to open and listen to; default is port 161.
.TP
.B "system contact"
Return string for a system.sysContact request; default is Unknown.
Please note: This is setable by a snmp set-request and saved.
.TP
.B "system location"
Return string for a system.sysLocation request; default is Unknown.
Please note: This is setable by a snmp set-request and saved.
.TP
.B "system name"
Return string for a system.sysName request; default is the hostname.
Please note: This is setable by a snmp set-request and saved.
.TP
.B "trap sink"
The host the trap is sent to; this parameter is passed to snmptrap(1).
The default is "localhost"
.TP
.B "trap community"
The trap community used; this parameter is passed to snmptrap(1). The
default is "public".
.TP
.B "authentraps"
Flag to indicate, traps should be sent. Possible values are "yes" 
and "no". The default is no.

.TP
.B "interface"
The value must have three fields: a string naming the interface, a
integer describing the type of the interface (ala RFC 1213) and a
integer describing the speed of the interface. Multiple entries are
possible. Look at the example below for a sample.

.SH EXAMPLE
.br
.nf
A sample /etc/snmpd.conf is:

## /etc/snmpd.conf:
##
## view configuration
##
##	viewName	OID			included/excluded
##
## internet
view	all		.1.3.6.1		included

## internet
view	mini		.1.3.6.1		included

## for v1 public exclude exclude mib-2.ident.identInfo
## and mib-2.host.hrSWRun in the mini view:
view	xmini		.1.3.6.1		included
view	xmini		.1.3.6.1.2.1.24.1	excluded
view	xmini		.1.3.6.1.2.1.25.4	excluded

## system, snmp, usecAgent, usecStats
view	semi		.1.3.6.1.2.1.1		included
view	semi		.1.3.6.1.2.1.11		included
view	semi		.1.3.6.1.6.3.6.1.1	included
view	semi		.1.3.6.1.6.3.6.1.2	included

## snmp, usecAgent, usecStats
view	semi		.1.3.6.1.2.1.11		included
view	semi		.1.3.6.1.6.3.6.1.1	included
view	semi		.1.3.6.1.6.3.6.1.2	included

##
## user configuration
##
##	noneRV	noneWV	authRV	authWV	userName[/authKey]
##
user	mini	-	all	all	public/0x05a1483bb7a0b314cc5cf9d27aee2a89

##
## community configuration
##
##	  commName	readV	writeV
##
community public	xmini	-
community private	mini	mini

##
## now follows the specific section of the linux-port.
##

##
## port to use (default is 161):
##
# port:		161

##
## the entry of system.Contact and system.Location:
##
system contact:		Kaept'n Koerg
system location:	Outer Regions
## system name is per default determined from the hostname:
# system name:		chappell 

##
## trap sink address and community string. (passed to snmptrap(1) 
## utility). authentraps contains the value of snmpEnableAuthenTraps;
## (``yes'' == send traps, default is ``no'' == disabled).
##
trap sink:		localhost
trap community:		public
authentraps:		no

##
## type and speed of interfaces:
##
interface:	lo0	24	20000000
interface:	eth0	 6	10000000
interface:	sl0	28	38400
interface:	sl1	28	38400
interface:	sl2	28	38400
interface:	sl3	28	38400
interface:	ppp0	23	38400
interface:	ppp1	23	38400
interface:	ppp2	23	38400
interface:	ppp3	23	38400

## end of /etc/snmpd.conf

.fi

.SH BUGS
There is currently no further documentation about the first usec
specific part.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
snmpd(8)
.SH AUTHOR
Things added for the Linux port by Erik Schoenfelder
(schoenfr@gaertner.de), inspired by Juergen Schoenwaelder
(schoenw@cs.utwente.nl).

