.\*/***********************************************************
.\" 	Copyright 1988, 1989 by Carnegie Mellon University
.\" 
.\"                       All Rights Reserved
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its 
.\" documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, 
.\" provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
.\" both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in 
.\" supporting documentation, and that the name of CMU not be
.\" used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
.\" software without specific, written prior permission.  
.\" 
.\" CMU DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" CMU BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR
.\" ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
.\" WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION,
.\" ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE.
.\" ******************************************************************/
.TH SNMPTRAP 1 "17 September 1989"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
snmptrap - Send an SNMP TRAP message to a host.
.SH SYNOPSIS
snmptrap host community trap-type specific-type device-description [ -a agent-addr ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
snmptrap is an SNMP application that forms and sends an SNMP TRAP message to
a host.
.PP
The
.I host
specification may be either a host name or an internet address
specified in "dot notation"
.PP
The
.I community
specifies the community name for the transaction with the remote system.
.PP
The
.I trap-type
and
.I specific-type
are integers that specify the type of trap message being sent.
.PP
The
.I device-description
is a textual description of the device sending this trap, to be used as the value of
a system.sysDescr.0 variable sent in the variable list of this trap message.
The optional argument
.I -a agent-addr
can be used to change the address from which the trap reports it is being sent.  Otherwise
the sending host's address is used.
.PP
For example
.PP
.I snmptrap nic.andrew.cmu.edu public 0 0
.I 'SUN 3/60: SUNOS4.0'
.PP
will send a Cold Start trap to the specified machine.
.PP
The defined trap types are:
.TP
.B 0
coldStart \- signifies that the sending protocol entity is
reinitializing itself such that the agent's configuration or the
protocol entity implementation may be altered.
.TP
.B 1
warmStart \- signifies that the sending protocol entity is
reinitializing itself such that neither the agent configuration nor
the protocol entity implementation is altered.
.TP
.B 2
linkDown \- signifies that the sending protocol entity
recognizes a failure in one of the communication links represented in
the agent's configuration.
.TP
.B 3
linkUp \- signifies that the sending protocol entity
recognizes that one of the communication links represented in the
agent's configuration has come up.
.TP
.B 4
authenticationFailure \- signifies that the sending protocol
entity is the addressee of a protocol message that is not properly
authenticated.  While implementations of the SNMP must be capable of
generating this trap, they must also be capable of suppressing the
emission of such traps via an implementation-specific mechanism.
.TP
.B 5
egpNeighborLoss \- signifies that an EGP neighbor for whom
the sending protocol entity was an EGP peer has been marked down and
the peer relationship no longer obtains.
.TP
.B 6
enterpriseSpecific \- signifies that the sending protocol
entity recognizes that some enterprise-specific event has occurred.
The specific-trap field identifies the particular trap which
occurred.
.PP
Adding a "-d" to the argument list will cause the application to dump the output packet.
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
RFC 1065, RFC 1066, RFC 1067
