Version 1.4
December 1995

                        Hyperlatex
                        ==========

Introduction
============

This is version 1.4 of the Hyperlatex package.  Hyperlatex allows you
to use a LaTeX-like language to prepare documents in HTML (the
hypertext markup language used by the world wide web), and, at the
same time, to produce a fine printed document from your input. You can
use all of LaTeX's power for the printed output, and you don't have to
learn a new language for creating hypertext documents.

Note that Hyperlatex is not meant to translate arbitrary Latex files
into Html. Rather, it provides an authoring environment for writing
printed documents and Html documents at the same time, using an
extended subset of Latex (excluding concepts that have no Html
counterpart and adding commands for new Html concepts such as
hyperlinks or included images).

Hyperlatex is ``free,'' this means that everyone is free to use it and
free to redistribute it on certain conditions. Hyperlatex is not in
the public domain; it is copyrighted and there are restrictions on its
distribution as follows:
  
Copyright (C) 1994, 1995 Otfried Schwarzkopf	
  
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.
     
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.
    
A copy of the GNU General Public License is available on the World
Wide web at "http://hobak.postech.ac.kr/otfried/txt/copying.txt".
You can also obtain it by writing to the Free Software Foundation,
Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Please report any bugs to me.

	Otfried Schwarzkopf <otfried@vision.postech.ac.kr>

The most recent version of Hyperlatex can be obtained from
"ftp.cs.ruu.nl", in the directory "/pub/X11/Ipe".

If you would like to be informed of any new release of Hyperlatex,
send me a note with your Email address.


Warning
=======

Hyperlatex 1.4 is a considerably revised version of Hyperlatex. There
have been some changes that make it incompatible with earlier versions
of Hyperlatex. The manual explains what exactly those changes are and
how to make sure your old files will work for Hyperlatex 1.4.
However, to be on the safe side, you may want to leave the Hyperlatex
1.3 installed on your system.  In particular if you are the system
administrator installing Hyperlatex for several users, you should make
sure that your users are aware of the update!


Disclaimer
==========

Please note that Hyperlatex is just a by-product of Ipe--I wrote it to
be able to write the Ipe manual the way I wanted to. I am making
Hyperlatex available because others seem to find it useful, but please
understand that I'm not in a position to provide professional
support. You can send bug reports to me, and even requests for
features, but as I will only work on Hyperlatex in my free time and
when I have nothing better to do, don't expect an immediate reply.


Contents
========

The tar file "Hyperlatex-1.4.tar.gz" contains the following files.

	README			What you are reading
	hyperlatex		A c-shell script to execute the Emacs macros
	hyperlatex-1.4.el	The Emacs macros to convert Latex->Html
	hyperlatex.sty		The LaTeX macros 
	hyperlatex.tex		The documentation 
	hyperlatex.ind		 ... and its index
        hlx-*.el                Support files for additional Latex packages
	ps2gif			A shell script to convert PS files to Gif
	giftrans.c		A copy of the giftrans program
	next.xbm		Three little icon bitmaps
	previous.xbm
	up.xbm

Note that the Hyperlatex converter requires that you have Emacs
installed on your system. In fact, I have only tried the macros with
FSF Emacs 18 and 19. I have no idea whether they are going to work
with earlier versions of FSF Emacs, or with other Emacsen.


Installing Hyperlatex
=====================

Installing Hyperlatex is easy--you just have to copy all the
files into the appropriate places. Here is what you have to do.

(1) Copy "hyperlatex.sty" into your system's TeX macro directory.

(2) Create a directory for Hyperlatex's Emacs lisp files.
    Typical choices would be either "/usr/local/lib/hyperlatex",
    or a subdirectory "hyperlatex" of your systems Emacs "site-lisp"
    directory. Let's call this directory HYPERLATEX_DIR.
    Copy all Emacs lisp files in the distribution to HYPERLATEX_DIR
    (i.e. all files with name "*.el")

(3) If you are going to use them, you should install the three bitmaps
    "next.xbm", "previous.xbm", and "up.xbm" in the icon directory of
    your WWW server, or, if you cannot do that, in your personal icon
    directory. (See below if you don't have a WWW server.)

(4) Edit the script "hyperlatex", and set HYPERLATEX_DIR to the
    directory from step (2), and HYPERLATEX_ICON_URL to the URL of
    your server's icon directory (without the trailing slash). If the
    URL for that directory contains a "~", you'll have to write that
    as "\~{}".

    If you don't have a server, then set `HYPERLATEX_ICON_URL' to the
    string ".". In that case you'll have to copy the bitmaps into the
    directory containing your output Html files.

(5) Copy the shell script "hyperlatex" into a location where it can be
    executed (e.g. "/usr/local/bin"). 

(6) Byte-compile the Emacs macros in "hyperlatex-1.4.el".
    This can be done as follows (under Unix):
    Change the current directory to HYPERLATEX_DIR, and type
      emacs -batch -q -no-site-file -l hyperlatex-1.4.el -f hyperlatex-compile
    This should not give you any error message. If it does, you can
    probably ignore them, but please mail me the error messages and
    the exact version of Emacs that you are using.
 
(7) That was all! Hyperlatex should be working now...
    You'll test it right away, since you want to look at the
    documentation, which is itself in Hyperlatex format.

    Type (maybe you will need "rehash" first)
        hyperlatex hyperlatex
    to generate the HTML version of the documentation. You can browse
    it with any HTML browser such as Mosaic or Netscape, e.g. by typing: 
	netscape html/hyperlatex.html

    You can also type 
	latex hyperlatex
    to generate a DVI file that you can preview and print as usual.
    (See below if you get a Latex error when you do this.)

(8) If you plan to convert TeX objects to bitmaps in your HTML documents,
    you should also install the shellscript "ps2gif". Change the
    definition of $PSTOPPM to point to your system's ghostscript
    directory (the one where "pstoppm.ps" resides), and install the
    script in a suitable location (probably the same as in (7)).

    Note that the script calls "giftrans" to make the created Gif
    files transparent. If you like this, you'll need to have
    version 1.8 or higher of "giftrans" installed. The source 
    of "giftrans" is included in this distribution (see the file on
    where it comes from and on its copyright). Just compile it and put
    it somewhere where it can be found. If you already have "giftrans"
    installed, make sure that it is at least version 1.8.


Problems?
=========

The "hyperlatex.sty" package loads another LaTeX2e package
"verbatim.sty" by Rainer Schoepf which has an improved definition of
'verbatim' and (more important for hyperlatex) a definition of a
'comment' environment. You will get a "Environment ifhtml undefined"
error if your version of "verbatim.sty" does not define 'comment'
suitably.  (And of course you will get an error if you do not have
"verbatim.sty".)  If that happens, I recommend that you get a recent
version of "verbatim.sty" from your closest CTAN-site. (There is a nice
Web interface at "http://jasper.ora.com/ctan.html". If you don't have
Web access, look in the TeX FAQ for you nearest CTAN site.)

If you get an error message because your Latex doesn't find 'a4.sty',
your site probably doesn't use A4 size paper. Just remove the
reference to 'a4paper' and to 'a4' from "hyperlatex.tex".

If you get an error message because your Latex doesn't find
'longtable.sty', comment out the "\usepackage{longtable}", and replace
"\newcommand{\LongTableAvailable}{1}" by
"\newcommand{\LongTableAvailable}{0}".


Acknowledgments
===============

The Hyperlatex code is based on the Emacs Lisp macros of the
"latexinfo" package.


Changes
=======

The manual contains a section describing all changes since Version 1.0

