array.o: alloc.h
array.o: array.c
array.o: local_nc.h
array.o: netcdf.h
attr.o: alloc.h
attr.o: attr.c
attr.o: local_nc.h
attr.o: netcdf.h
cdf.o: alloc.h
cdf.o: cdf.c
cdf.o: local_nc.h
cdf.o: netcdf.h
cdftest.o: cdftest.c
cdftest.o: netcdf.h
dim.o: alloc.h
dim.o: dim.c
dim.o: local_nc.h
dim.o: netcdf.h
error.o: error.c
error.o: local_nc.h
error.o: netcdf.h
externinit.o: externinit.c
externinit.o: netcdf.h
file.o: alloc.h
file.o: file.c
file.o: local_nc.h
file.o: netcdf.h
globdef.o: globdef.c
globdef.o: netcdf.h
iarray.o: alloc.h
iarray.o: iarray.c
iarray.o: local_nc.h
iarray.o: netcdf.h
putget.o: alloc.h
putget.o: local_nc.h
putget.o: netcdf.h
putget.o: putget.c
putgetg.o: local_nc.h
putgetg.o: netcdf.h
putgetg.o: putgetg.c
rectest.o: alloc.h
rectest.o: netcdf.h
rectest.o: rectest.c
sharray.o: alloc.h
sharray.o: local_nc.h
sharray.o: netcdf.h
sharray.o: sharray.c
string.o: alloc.h
string.o: local_nc.h
string.o: netcdf.h
string.o: string.c
var.o: alloc.h
var.o: local_nc.h
var.o: netcdf.h
var.o: var.c
version.o: version.c
xdrffio.o: local_nc.h
xdrffio.o: netcdf.h
xdrffio.o: xdrffio.c
xdrposix.o: alloc.h
xdrposix.o: local_nc.h
xdrposix.o: netcdf.h
xdrposix.o: xdrposix.c
xdrstdio.o: local_nc.h
xdrstdio.o: netcdf.h
xdrstdio.o: xdrstdio.c
