.TH HFORMAT 1 02-Apr-1996 HFSUTILS
.SH NAME
hformat \- create a new HFS filesystem and make it current
.SH SYNOPSIS
hformat
[-l
.IR label ]
.I destination-path
.RI [ partition-no ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hformat
is used to write a new HFS filesystem to a volume. A UNIX pathname to the
volume's destination must be specified. The destination may be either a block
device or a regular file, but must already exist and be writable. (If a
regular file, the size of the file determines the maximum size of the
resulting volume image.)
.PP
An optional label can be specified to name the volume. The name must be
between 1-27 characters and cannot contain a colon (:). By default, the volume
will be named
.BR Untitled .
.PP
If a partition number
.I n
is specified, the
.IR n th
HFS partition in the existing medium will receive the filesystem. By default,
and also when
.I n
is
.BR 0 ,
the entire medium (entire file or entire block device) will be formatted with
the new filesystem. If a partition is specified, it must already exist.
.PP
The new volume will be empty, but will also become "current" so subsequent
commands will refer to it. The current working directory for the volume is set
to the root of the volume.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SP
.TP
% dd if=/dev/zero of=disk.hfs bs=1k count=800
.TP
% hformat disk.hfs
This sequence creates an 800K HFS volume image in the file
.B
disk.hfs
in the current directory, and names it
.BR Untitled .
.TP
% hformat /dev/fd0
If a floppy disk is available as
.BR /dev/fd0 ,
this formats the disk to its maximum capacity as an HFS volume named
.BR Untitled .
(N.B. The floppy must already have received a low-level format by other
means.)
.TP
% hformat -l "Loma Prieta" /dev/sd2 1
If a SCSI disk is available as
.BR /dev/sd2 ,
this initializes the first HFS partition on the disk (which must already
exist) with a new filesystem, naming the resulting volume
.BR "Loma Prieta" .
.SH NOTES
The smallest volume size which can be formatted with
.B hformat
is 800K.
.SH SEE ALSO
hfsutils(1), hmount(1)
.SH FILES
$HOME/.hcwd
.SH AUTHOR
Robert Leslie <rob@mars.org>
