.TH HMOUNT 1 13-Jan-1997 HFSUTILS
.SH NAME
hmount \- introduce a new HFS volume and make it current
.SH SYNOPSIS
hmount
.I source-path
.RI [ partition-no ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hmount
is used to introduce a new HFS volume. A UNIX pathname to the volume's source
must be specified. The source may be a block device or a regular file
containing an HFS volume image.
.PP
If a partition number
.I n
is specified and the volume source is located on a partitioned medium, the
.IR n th
HFS partition on the source will be mounted. By default, the first HFS
partition found is mounted.
.PP
The mounted volume becomes "current" so subsequent commands will refer to it.
The current working directory for the volume is set to the root of the volume.
This information is kept in a file named
.I .hcwd
in the user's home directory.
.PP
If the source medium is changed (e.g. floppy or CD-ROM disc exchanged) after
.B hmount
has been called, subsequent HFS commands will fail until the original medium
is replaced or a different volume is made current. To use the same source
path with the different medium, reissue the
.B hmount
command.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SP
.TP
% hmount /dev/fd0
If a Macintosh floppy disk is available as
.BR /dev/fd0 ,
this command makes the floppy current for other HFS commands such as hls(1),
hcd(1), hcopy(1), etc.
.TP
% hmount /dev/sd2 1
If a SCSI disk is available as
.BR /dev/sd2 ,
this command finds the first HFS partition on the medium and makes it
available for other HFS operations.
.SH NOTES
.B hmount
does not actually mount an HFS partition over a UNIX directory in the
traditional mount(8) sense. It is merely a "virtual" mount, as a point of
convenience for future HFS operations. Each HFS command independently opens,
operates on, and closes the named source path given to
.BR hmount .
.SH SEE ALSO
hfsutils(1), hformat(1), humount(1), hvol(1)
.SH FILES
$HOME/.hcwd
.SH BUGS
Relative source pathnames are never made absolute, and so may cause problems
if your UNIX current working directory changes. Absolute pathnames are
therefore recommended.
.SH AUTHOR
Robert Leslie <rob@mars.org>
