.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt
.\" (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de), Fri Apr 2 11:32:09 MET DST
.\" 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\" 
.\" Modified by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de) 24 Apr 1993
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:28:08 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Translated Thu Jun 6 1996 by
.\"   Miguel Angel Sepulveda (angel@vivaldi.princeton.edu)
.TH INTRO 7  "6 Junio 1996" "Linux" "Manual del Programador"
.SH "NOMBRE"
intro \- Introducción a la sección de misceláneos.
.SH "DESCRIPCIÓN"
Esta sectión describe diversos tópicos tales como el paquete de macros
para nroff, tablas, ficheros de cabezera en C, la herarquía de
ficheros, conceptos generales, y otros tópicos que no pegan
en nigún otro sitio.
.SH "AUTORES"
En el encabezamiento de capa página se encuentran el ó los autores así como
las condiciones del derecho de autor. Nótese que dichas condiciones
varian de página en página.






