.TH command.reg 1 "6 Jan 1995" "GroupKit"
.SH NAME
command.reg \- simple GroupKit command line registration interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP 
\fBcommand.reg ?-p\fIport\fR? ?-h\fIhost\fR? ?\fIconfname\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
Command.reg provides a very light-weight command line registrar
client.  The idea with command.reg is to allow joining 
"standard" conferences very easily, such as a PostIt note
conference which would allow placing notes on other users' 
screens.  As such, this registrar client could be started up
in a .xinitrc file.

If \fIconfname\fR is omitted, this registrar client will
list the names of the currently running conferences.  If
\fIconfname\fR is instead specified, and a conference with
that name exists, the user will be joined to that conference.
Finally, if the named conference does not exist, command.reg
assumes that \fIconfname\fR is the name of a conference type
(e.g. "Brainstorming Tool") and creates a new conference of
that type using \fIconfname\fR as its name.

This registrar client connects to the central registrar,
which it locates by examining the "host" and "port" keys
in the "registrar" environment, which are usually specified
in the user's .groupkitrc file.  If the port is not specified,
it defaults to 9068.  The registrar's host and port can be
overridden on the command line by specifying the \fI-h\fR
or \fI-p\fR options.

This registrar client remains running until the conference
that it spawns terminates.

.SH BUGS
When creating a new conference, command.reg does not check to
see if the specified \fIconfname\fR corresponds to a valid 
conference type, but blindly tries to create it anyway.  This 
gets cleaned up when the non-existent conference fails to
connect back to the registrar client, but things should not
get this far in the first place.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
registrar(1), gk_initGenericRC(n)

.SH AUTHOR
Mark Roseman (roseman@cpsc.ucalgary.ca)
