.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de), Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\" 
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:08:16 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Traduction 17/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH MOTD 5 "17 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel de l'administrateur Linux"
.SH NOM
motd \- Message du jour.
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB/etc/motd\fP (Message Of The Day)
est un fichier de texte ASCII dont le contenu est affiche
par
.IR login (1)
avant d'executer le shell.

Ce fichier contient generalement des messages 
destines aux utilisateurs
concernant l'administration du systeme 
(ajout de peripheriques, arrets prevus du systeme, nouvelles versions
de logiciels, etc...)
.SH EXEMPLE
.nf
$ ls -l /etc/motd
-rw-r--r--   1 root     root        71 Oct 17 17:09 /etc/motd
$ cat /etc/motd 

Les pages de manuel de Linux
Section 5 sont traduites.

  -admin-

$
.fi
.SH FICHIERS
/etc/motd
.SH "VOIR AUSSI"
.BR login (1)
