.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de), Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\" 
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:17:50 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Thu Oct 19 21:25:21 MET 1995 by Martin Schulze <joey@infodrom.north.de>
.\" Traduction 18/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH TTYTYPE 5 "18 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel de l'administrateur Linux"
.SH NOM
ttytype \- Liste des noms de terminaux et de peripheriques.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Ttytype
est un fichier de texte ASCII contenant la liste des terminaux, comme dans
termcap, associes aux ttys (sans le prefixe
.IR /dev/ )
auxquels ils sont attaches.

Ceci est utilise par le programme tset pour positionner la variable
d'environnement TERM au nom correct du terminal de l'utilisateur.
.SH EXEMPLE
Un fichier
.I /etc/ttytype
typique est :
.RS
.sp
con80x25 tty1
.br
vt320 ttys0
.sp
.RE
.SH FICHIERS
.TP
.I /etc/ttytype
le fichier de definition des ttys.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR getty "(1), " termcap (5)
