WN QUICKSTART (version 1.14.0)

----------------------------
1. In the directory where you found this file (the top directory of
the WN distribution) run the command "perl configure" and answer the
questions.  You can run it multiple times if you wish.

----------------------------
2. In this same directory run "make" or "make install".

----------------------------
3. Create an HTML file, name it index.html and put it in the directory
you have designated as your data root.  Add other HTML files if you
want.

----------------------------

4. In your data root directory create a file named "index" that
contains only the line

	Attribute=serveall

Now in that directory run the command "wndex".  This creates a data
base "index.cache" of information about files you are serving.  The
serveall directive grants permission to serve all files in this
directory (your data root directory).  If you used the line 
"File=index.html" instead of "Attribute=serveall" then only the file
index.html could be served. 

  NOTE: If you did "make install" the wndex program and the server
  binaries "wn" and "swn" are located in the directory where you told
  'configure' to put the binaries (probably "bin" in the top source
  directory).

----------------------------
5. Start the server using "swn" (this is the standalone version of
WN).  If your default port is 80 you will need to be root to do this.
If you can't become root try "swn -p 8080" which will run the server
on port 8080.  A good test to start is 

	swn -p 8080 -v -L /tmp/log -l /tmp/errlog 

The -v option requests verbose logging (only use -v if you didn't
request verbose logging in answer to the configure script questions).
The -L and -l options specify log files.  They will have useful information
if anything goes wrong (the most common problem is permissions set 
incorrectly on the files you want to serve -- they should be world 
readable).

----------------------------
6. Try it with a browser.  The URL will be 

	http://yourhost/  
	
or http://yourhost:8080/ if you used the -p 8080 option.

----------------------------
7.  Now read the documentation in the docs/ directory. The quickest
way to do this is with a Web browser and the URL

	file:/path/2/WN_src/docs/manual.html

If you do this searching won't work (because the WN server does the
searching and using "file://..." bypasses the server.  So a better
way assuming your server is going is to put a symbolic link in your
data root directory to /path/2/WN_src/docs/ and then use the URL

	http://yourhost/docs/manual.html



John Franks
