.\" @(#)man/man8/setfont.8	1.0 941227
.TH SETFONT 8 "1 Feb 1994" "Local" "International Support"
.SH NAME
setfont \- load EGA/VGA console screen font
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B setfont
.RI [ "-o font.orig" "] [" "-fontsize" "] [" "font.new" ]
.RI [ "-m cmap" "] [" "-om cmap.orig" ]
.RI [ "-u umap" "] [" "-ou umap.orig" ]
.RI [ -v "] [" -V ]
.IX "setfont command" "" "\fLsetfont\fR command"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I setfont
command loads a font into the EGA/VGA character generator,
and optionally outputs the previous font.
This command reads an 8xH font from the file and loads it
into the character generator memory. Usually the font size H
will be clear from the file size, but if the input file has
code page format, containing the three fonts 8x8, 8x14 and 8x16,
the option -8 or -14 or -16 must be used to select one.
If no args are given (or only the option
.I -fontsize
), then a default font is loaded.
With the -v option,
.I setfont
will be verbose.
With the -V option, it prints its version.

As currently there is no mode switching support in the Linux kernel, 
.I setfont
has nothing to do with the current EGA/VGA mode. It's totally user's
responsibility to choose a font matching the current video mode.
.PP
Font files are binary files of size 256*H bytes, containing
bit images for each of 256 characters, one byte per scan line, and
H bytes per character (0 < H <= 32).
Also .psf files are accepted; these files have the same format
but an additional 4 byte header.

The ordering of the symbols in the font is described by a
mapping table. Some fonts have a mapping table included in
the font file, and
.I setfont
will load such a mapping table. If no explicit mapping
table is included in the font, and no mapping table is
provided using the -m option, the `trivial' mapping is assumed.
In any case the mapping table just loaded is activated
by outputting the string Esc ( K.
Giving a
.I "-m none"
argument inhibits the loading and activation of a mapping table.
The previous mapping table can be saved to a file using the
.I "-om file"
option.
These options of setfont render mapscrn(8) obsolete.

The correspondence between the glyphs in the font and
Unicode values is described by a Unicode mapping table.
Some fonts have a Unicode mapping table included in
the font file, and an explicit table can be indicated using
the -u option.
.I Setfont
will load such a Unicode mapping table, unless a
.I "-u none"
argument is given. The previous Unicode mapping table
can be saved to a file using the
.I "-ou file"
option.

One may add a Unicode mapping table to a psf font using
.IR psfaddtable (1).

.SH "FILES"
/usr/lib/kbd/consolefonts is the default directory for fonts.
/usr/lib/kbd/consoletrans is the default directory for mappings.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR mapscrn (8)
.SH "AUTHORS"
Eugene G. Crosser (crosser@pccross.msk.su)
.br
Andries E. Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
