.TH Animate 1.3 "December 1996"
.UC
.SH NAME
Animate \- the AfterStep Animate module
.SH SYNOPSIS
Animate is spawned by afterstep, so no command line invocation will work.
From within the .steprc file, Animate is spawned as follows:
.nf
.sp
Module Animate
.sp
.fi
or from within an afterstep pop-up menu:
.nf
.sp
Popup "Module-Popup"
	Title   "Modules"
	Module  "Wharf"         Wharf
	Module  "NoClutter"     Clean
	Module  "Identify"      Ident
	Module  "Banner"        Banner
	Module  "Debug"         Debug
	Module  "SaveDesktop"   Save
	Module  "Pager"         Pager 0 3
	Module  "Animate"       Animate
EndPopup
.sp
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
The Animate module animates window actions.  It currently animates
iconification and deiconification in a zoom style or a twisty spinning style.

.SH INITIALIZATION
During initialization, \fIAnimate\fP will eventually search a 
configuration file which describes the time-outs and actions to take.
The configuration file is the same file that afterstep used during
initialization.

.SH INVOCATION
The invocation method was shown in the synopsis section

.SH CONFIGURATION OPTIONS
Animate reads the same .steprc file as fvwm reads when it starts up,
and looks for certain configuration options:

.IP "*AnimateColor \fBcolor\fP"
Tells Animate what color to draw with.

.IP "*AnimateDelay \fBmsecs\fP"
Tells Animate how many milliseconds to sleep between frames of animation.

.IP "*AnimateIterations \fBiterations\fP"
Tells Animate how many steps to break the animation into.

.IP "*AnimateTwist \fBtwist\fP"
Tells Animate how many revolutions to twist the iconification frame.

.IP "*AnimateWidth \fBwidth\fP"
Tells Animate how wide a line to draw with.  Note that with 0 is a fast line
at Width 1

.IP "*AnimateResize \fBmode\fP"
Tells Animate what method to use to draw resizes.  \fIzoom\fP and \fItwist\fP
are currently supported.

.SH AUTHOR
\fIAlfredo Kengi Kojima\fP <kojima@inf.ufrgs.br>

.SH ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
These people have contributed to Animate:

.IP "\fIKaj Groner\fP <kajg@mindspring.com>"
Twisty iconification, configuration file parsing, man page.

