.\" t
.\" @(#)FvwmCommand.1x	7/16/96
.TH FvwmCommand 1x "July 16 1996"
.UC
.SH NAME
FvwmCommand \- the FVWM command external interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
In .fvwm2rc file or from FvwmConsole:

.RS
Module FvwmCommandS
.RE

Then, in script file or from shell:

.RS
FvwmCommand <fvwm command...>
.RE

.SH DESCRIPTION

FvwmCommand lets you issue fvwm command from a shell command
line or scripts. 
FvwmCommand takes each argument as a fvwm command. Quotes can be 
used to send commands including spaces.

.br
FvwmCommand.pm is for perl scripts in order 
to keep the syntax similar to fvwm configuration file. 

.RS
.ns
use FvwmCommand;
.br
if( $ARGV[0] eq 'home' ) { 
.br
    Desk 0,0; GotoPage '1 1'; 
.br
}elsif( $ARGV[0] eq 'jump' ) { 
.br
    Desk "0 2"; GotoPage 1, 1; 
.br
}
.rs
.RE

Commas can be used to separate Fvwm commands' arguments or quotes
can be used combine them. The commands are case sensitive.

.br
FvwmCommand.f is collection of functions for bourn shell or its
cousines. It is to be sourced:

.RS
\&. FvwmCommand.f
.br
DesktopSize 5x5
.RE

The commands are case sensitive. 

.SH COPYRIGHTS
Copyright 1996, Toshi Isogai. No guarantees or warranties are provided.
Use this program at your own risk. Permission to use this program for
any purpose is given, as long as the copyright is kept intact. 


.SH INVOCATION
FvwmCommandS should be spawned once by fvwm, either in .fvwm2rc file,
from menu, or from FvwmConsole.
From then on, FvwmCommand
can be called from a shell or script to execute fvwm commands.
.SH CONFIGURATION OPTIONS
None.

.SH SEE ALSO
fvwm2

.SH AUTHOR
Toshi Isogai  isogai@kentek.com


