.\" Marcus J. Ranum, 1993
.\" Copyright (C) Trusted Information Systems, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved
.TH AUTHMGR 8 "3 September 1993"
.SH NAME
authmgr - network authentication client program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B authmgr
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX  "auth daemon"  ""  "\fLauthmgr\fP \(em authentication daemon"
.LP
.B authmgr
is a client-side interface to the authentication daemon
.B authsrv.
It serves a purpose of convenience only, passing most of
its commands directly over a network to
.B authsrv.
.B authmgr
is useful if an administrator wishes to access the
authentication server over a network, or wishes to
encrypt the connection. All commands supported by
.B authsrv
are supported by
.B authmgr
with the same syntax, with the addition of a
.B login [username]
command that automates authentication to
.B authsrv.
.SH OPTIONS
.LP
.B authmgr
takes no command line options, reading its configuration
information from the firewall toolkit configuration
file
.B netperm-table(5)
All configuration rules in
.B netperm-table
for application "authmgr" are read, and the following clauses
and parameters are recognized:
.TP
.B authserver hostname [[port] key]
specifies the hostname or network address where the authentication
server is running. If the optional
.B port
is specified, it is used
as a numeric service port value. If the optional
.B key
is specified, all traffic with the server is DES-encrypted using
the shared key. Keys must match between client and server.
.PP
If compiled-in values for authserver and port are provided,
they will be used as a default, if there are none specified
in
.B netperm-table.
.SH INSTALLATION
.LP
To install
.B authmgr,
configure the
.B authserver 
option in
.B netperm-table
to contain the address of the authentication server system.
Check connectivity by attempting to log in.
.SH FILES
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR netperm-table (5)
.BR authsrv (8)
.SH BUGS
