.\"Wei Xu, 1994
.\" Copyright (C) Trusted Information Systems, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved
.TH X-GW 8 "12 August 1994"
.SH NAME
x-gw \- X gateway service 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B x-gw [display/hostname]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX  "x-gw"  ""  "\(em X-GATEWAY proxy server"
.B x-gw
provides a user-level X connection service under tn-gw and 
rlogin-gw access control. Clients may be started on arbitrary internet hosts, 
and request to display on a virtual display running on the firewall. 
When the connection request arrives,
.B x-gw 
pops up a window on the user's real display which asks for confirmation 
before permitting the connection. If granted, 
.B x-gw
passes data between the virtual display and the user's real display. 
.PP
Previously, in order to run X through the firewall, 
exceptions has to be made in router configuration rules 
to permit direct connectivity to ports from 6000 
to 6100 on internal systems. 
.B x-gw
searches for an unused lowest port for the X connection 
starting from 6010 and listening for connections. 
.PP
Each time an X client application on a remote system starts, 
a control connection window will pop up on the user's screen 
that asks for confirmation before permitting the connection.
If granted, the connection is handled by an individual 
.B x-gw 
child daemon to serve multiple simultaneous connections seperately
with its own buffed data flow. 
The child daemon cleans up the buffed data and exits 
if a connection is closed by either end.
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
.na 
.sp 1
sol-> telnet wxu
Trying 192.33.112.194...
Connected to wxu.tis.com.
Escape character is '^]'.
wxu.tis.com telnet proxy (Version V1.3) ready:
tn-gw-> x
tn-gw-> exit
Disconnecting...
Connection closed by foreign host.
.fi
.ad
.sp 1
A window pops up on the user's screen which shows the port number 
of the proxy to use, and which acts as the control window. 
Clicking on the exit button will close all multiple simultaneous X connections.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B display/hostname
specify a destination display where the user wants applications to appear. By
default 
.B x-gw
will use the connecting host name followed by port number: 0.0, 
if the argument is not specified. The 0.0 port is also a default number 
if the user sets the display to a host name.
.IP  
.SH INSTALLATION
.LP
To install
.B x-gw
first place the excutable in a system area, then modify 
.B  netperm-table
to reflect the appropriate excutable path.
The location of 
.B x-gw
is compiled into the components of the firewall tookit in 
.B tn-gw
and
.B rlogin-gw
based on the 
.B  netperm-table.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR netperm-table(5)
.BR tn-gw(8)
.BR rlogin-gw(8)
