.\" +----------
.\" |
.\" |			      GITACTION man page
.\" | 			  Release 4.3.6, January 1995
.\" |
.\" |	   Copyright 1993, 1994, 1995 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" |
.\" |	This file is part of GIT (GNU Interactive Tools)
.\" |
.\" |	GIT is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
.\" | the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" | Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
.\" | version.
.\" |
.\" | GIT is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
.\" | WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
.\" | FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more
.\" | details.
.\" |
.\" | You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" | with GIT; see the file COPYING. If not, write to the Free Software
.\" | Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\" |
.\" |
.TH gitaction 1 "January 1995" "Release 4.3.6"
.SH NAME
gitaction \- GNU Interactive Tools version 4.3.6 - per file type action script
.SH SYNTAX
.I gitaction
.I directory, file
.br
.I .gitaction directory, file

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I gitaction
is a script that executes a different action for each file type
specified. It is called by the
.I git
program when pressing
.B F2
or
.B ^Xa
(see the
.B .gitrc.TERM
configuration files in the
.I git
manual). The first parameter is the current directory name and the second
one is the file name to be matched against the default patterns. The
matching is done using the shell 'case' statement
If you press
.B F2
or
.B ^Xa
on a
.B "*.c"
file,
.I git
will compile it, if you press
.B F2
or
.B ^Xa
on a
.B "*.tar.gz"
file,
.I git
will list the tar archive contents, if you press the same keys on a
.B "*.gz"
file,
.I git
will display its uncompressed contents on the screen, etc ...
By default
.I gitaction
checks for the following patterns:

"*.cc" "*.c" "*.l" "*.y" "*.h" "*.s" "*.S" "*.o" "*.a" "*.sa"
"Makefile" "makefile"
"*.tar.gz" "*.tgz" "*.tar.z" "*.tar.Z" "*.taz" "*.tar" "*.gz"
"*.z" "*.Z"
"*.zip" "*.arj" "*.rar"
"*.doc" "*.txt" "*.lsm"
"*.gif" "*.jpg" "*.jpeg" "*.tif" "*.bmp"
"*.mpg"
"*.mod" "*.s3m" "*.voc" "*.wav"
"*.ps" "*.dvi" "*.tex"
compressed/uncompressed manual pages

and acts as appropriate. If  no  pattern is found, the file is displayed
using more. Feel free to change this. If you want to find out what the
default action for each file type is (or if you want to modify it), just
read/modify the
.I gitaction
script.

If you press
.B F2
or
.B ^Xa
on a
.B "*.gif"
file or
.B "*.jpg"
file and you have the
.I zgv
utility installed, you will be able to see it. If you want to change
the gif/jpeg viewer, all you need to do is to change its name in the
.I gitaction
script. I don't know a
.B "*.bmp"
or
.B "*.tif"
viewer. Feel free to add one in the
.I gitaction
script.

The script can be easy enhanced. Just read it.

The
.I .gitaction
script is a local version of the
.I gitaction
script. When started,
.I gitaction
tries to search a script called
.B .gitaction
in the current directory and, if it finds it, it starts it. If
.IR .gitaction 's
exit code is 0 (
.I .gitaction
couldn't find a matching pattern),
.I gitaction
starts its own case statement trying to match the current file name (the
second parameter) against its default patterns.

The
.I .gitaction
script *must* be executable. An example of
.I .gitaction
can be fount in
.BR /usr/local/lib .
You should copy the example in the current directory and then modify it.


.SH BUGS
These manual page is obsolete.  It documents version 4.3.5 of the
GNU Interactive Tools package.  Only the GIT's info documentation
is being updated.

Please send bug reports to:
.br
.IR tudor@cs.unh.edu

.SH SEE ALSO
git(1) gitps(1) gitview(1) gitmount(1) gitkeys(1) gitrgrep(1)

.SH FILES
/usr/local/bin/gitaction
.br
/usr/local/lib/.gitaction
.br
/usr/local/man/man1/gitaction.1

.SH AUTHORS
.I Tudor Hulubei
.br
- tudor@cs.unh.edu
.br
.I Andrei Pitis
.br
- pink@pub.ro
.br
.B "Politehnica" University of Bucharest
.br
.B Romania
