.\" +----------
.\" |
.\" |			       GITMOUNT man page
.\" | 			  Release 4.3.6, January 1995
.\" |
.\" |	    Copyright 1993, 1994, 1995 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" |
.\" |	This file is part of GIT (GNU Interactive Tools)
.\" |
.\" |	GIT is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
.\" | the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" | Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
.\" | version.
.\" |
.\" | GIT is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
.\" | WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
.\" | FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more
.\" | details.
.\" |
.\" | You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" | with GIT; see the file COPYING. If not, write to the Free Software
.\" | Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\" |
.\" |
.TH gitmount 1 "January 1995" "Release 4.3.6"
.SH NAME
gitmount \- GNU Interactive Tools version 4.3.6 - auto-mount script
.SH SYNTAX
.I gitmount device

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I gitmount
is a script which allows you to mount any block device without
specifying the file system type. You may now insert the floppy in the
drive and type  '
.BR "gitmount fd0" '
and the first floppy will be mounted in the directory 
.BR /mnt/fd0 .
On Linux just press
.B F11
or
.BR F12 .
You don't need to know the file system type anymore. The directories
.B /mnt/fd0
and
.B /mnt/fd1
must exist. If you want to use gitmount with the block device
.B /dev/xxx
then the directory
.B /mnt/xxx
must exist too.



.SH BUGS
These manual page is obsolete.  It documents version 4.3.5 of the
GNU Interactive Tools package.  Only the GIT's info documentation
is being updated.

Please send bug reports to:
.br
.IR tudor@cs.unh.edu

.SH SEE ALSO
git(1) gitps(1) gitview(1) gitkeys(1) gitaction(1) gitrgrep(1)

.SH FILES
/usr/local/bin/gitmount
.br
/usr/local/man/man1/gitmount.1

.SH AUTHORS
.I Tudor Hulubei
.br
- tudor@cs.unh.edu
.br
.I Andrei Pitis
.br
- pink@pub.ro
.br
.B "Politehnica" University of Bucharest
.br
.B Romania
