.\" +----------
.\" |
.\" |			       GITRGREP man page
.\" | 			  Release 4.3.6, January 1995
.\" |
.\" |	    Copyright 1993, 1994, 1995 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" |
.\" |	This file is part of GIT (GNU Interactive Tools)
.\" |
.\" |	GIT is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
.\" | the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" | Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
.\" | version.
.\" |
.\" | GIT is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
.\" | WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
.\" | FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more
.\" | details.
.\" |
.\" | You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" | with GIT; see the file COPYING. If not, write to the Free Software
.\" | Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\" |
.\" |
.TH gitrgrep 1 "January 1995" "Release 4.3.6"
.SH NAME
gitrgrep \- GNU Interactive Tools version 4.3.6 - recursive grep
.SH SYNTAX
.I gitrgrep [grep-like options]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I gitrgrep
is a very small script that calls grep recursively. It accepts grep-like
options/parameters, the only difference being that file specifications
should be quoted:

	gitrgrep main '*.c'

or

	gitrgrep errno '*.c *.h'


.SH BUGS
These manual page is obsolete.  It documents version 4.3.5 of the
GNU Interactive Tools package.  Only the GIT's info documentation
is being updated.

/bin/sh should support functions in order to run
.IR gitrgrep .
Use bash to be sure.

Please send bug reports to
.br
.IR tudor@cs.unh.edu

.SH SEE ALSO
git(1) gitps(1) gitview(1) gitkeys(1) gitaction(1) gitmount(1)

.SH FILES
/usr/local/bin/gitrgrep
.br
/usr/local/man/man1/gitrgrep.1

.SH AUTHORS
.I Tudor Hulubei
.br
- tudor@cs.unh.edu
.br
.I Andrei Pitis
.br
- pink@pub.ro
.br
.B "Politehnica" University of Bucharest
.br
.B Romania
