.\" X-BASED HEXAGONS
.\"
.\" xhexagons.man
.\"
.\" ##
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1994 - 97	David Albert Bagley
.\"
.\"                   All Rights Reserved
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and
.\" its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted,
.\" provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and
.\" that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
.\" supporting documentation, and that the name of the author not be
.\" used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
.\" software without specific, written prior permission.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be "playable",
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.TH HEXAGONS 6 "01 January 1997" "V5.4"
.SH NAME
xhexagons \- Hexagons X widget
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /usr/games/xhexagons
[-geometry [{width}][x{height}][{+-}{xoff}[{+-}{yoff}]]]
[-display [{host}]:[{vs}]]
[-{foreground|fg} <color>] [-{background|bg} <color>]
[-{border|bd} <color>] [-tile <color>] [-{size <int>]
[-[no]corners] [-username {string}]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
The puzzle was thought up by the author, though he believes he saw one in
a toy museum in Germany or Austria.  Also Bernhard Wiezorke has the
"Hexafax, the New Fifteen Puzzle" which is similar.
.SH FEATURES
If in corners mode: Press "\fBmouse-left\fP" button to move a tile, then
release "\fBmouse-left\fP" button on a space.  It will not move if blocked.
One can only move one tile at a time. The only tiles that can be moved are
the tile(s) next to both spaces.
.br
If in nocorners mode: Click "\fBmouse-left\fP" button to move a tile.
One can move more than one tile at a time and one is not constrained by
parity.
.LP
Click "\fBmouse-right\fP" button, or press "\fBR\fP" or "\fBr\fP" keys,
to randomize the puzzle.  One must double click on "\fBmouse-right\fP" if
the puzzle is being worked on.
.LP
Press "\fBI\fP" or "\fBi\fP" keys to increase the number of tiles.
.LP
Press "\fBD\fP" or "\fBd\fP" keys to decrease the number of tiles.
.LP
Press "\fBC\fP" or "\fBc\fP" keys to toggle corners mode.  (Default is on).
.LP
"\fBS\fP" or "\fBs\fP" keys reserved for the auto-solver (unimplemented).
.LP
Press "\fBU\fP" or "\fBu\fP" keys to undo move.
.LP
Press "\fBG\fP" or "\fBg\fP" keys to get a saved puzzle.
.LP
Press "\fBW\fP" or "\fBw\fP" keys to write or save a puzzle.
.LP
Press "\fBQ\fP", "\fBq\fP", or "\fBCTRL-C\fP" keys to kill program.
.LP
Use the key pad, "R" keys, or arrow keys to move without the mouse.
.br
Key pad is defined for Hexagons as:
.br
7   9   Upper Left, Upper Right
.sp
  ^
.sp
4< >6   Left, Right
.sp
  v
.sp
1   3   Lower Left, Lower Right
.LP
The title is in the following format (non-motif version):
.RS
xhexagons: <size> @ (<Number of moves>/{<Record number of moves>
<username>|"NEVER noaccess"}) - <Comment>
.RE
If there is no record of the current puzzle, it displays "NEVER noaccess".
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B \-geometry {+|\-}\fIX\fP{+|\-}\fIY\fP
This option sets the initial position of the hexagons window (resource
name "\fIgeometry\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-display \fIhost\fP:\fIdpy\fP
This option specifies the X server to contact.
.TP 8
.B \-{foreground|fg} \fIcolor\fP
This option specifies the foreground of the hexagons window (resource name
"\fIforeground\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-{background|bg} \fIcolor\fP
This option specifies the background of the hexagons window (resource name
"\fIbackground\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-{border|bd} \fIcolor\fP
This option specifies the border color of the tiles in the hexagons window
(resource name "\fIborderColor\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-tile \fIcolor\fP
This option specifies the tile color of the tiles in the hexagons window
(resource name "\fItileColor\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-size <\fIint\fP>
This option allows you to change the number of hexagons in a row (resource
name "\fIsizeA\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-corners
This option specifies the mode where movement is very restrictive (resource
name "\fIcorners\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-nocorners
This option specifies the mode where movement is very easy (resource name
 "\fIcorners\fP").
.TP 8
.B \-username \fIstring\fP
This option specifies the user name for any records made or else it will
get your login name (resource name "\fIuserName\fP").
.SH SAVE FORMAT
The format is not standard.  The reason for this is that this is simple and
I do not know what the standard is.
.sp
.RS
size: 1-12 <number of tiles in a row>
.br
corners: 0-1 <0 false, 1 true; if 0 then hexagon corners are all snipped>
.br
moves: 0-MAXINT <total number of moves>
.sp
startingPosition: <array where 0 is the empty space for the HIGH hexagon
and -1 is the empty space for the LOW hexagon>
.RE
.sp
This is then followed by the moves, starting from 1.
.RS
move #: <direction>
.RE
Direction is represented as 0 upper right, 1 right, 2 lower right,
3 lower left, 4 left, and 5 upper left.
.sp
Caution: the program may crash on corrupted input.
.SH REFERENCES
"Hexafax, the New Fifteen Puzzle" brochure by Bernhard Wiezorke
.SH SEE ALSO
.LP
X(1), xrubik(6), xskewb(6), xdino(6), xpyraminx(6), xoct(6), xmball(6),
xmlink(6), xpanex(6), xcubes(6), xtriangles(6), xabacus(1)
.SH COPYRIGHTS
.LP
\*R Copyright 1994-97, David Albert Bagley
.SH BUG REPORTS AND PROGRAM UPDATES
.LP
Send bugs (or their reports, or fixes) to the author
.RS
David Albert Bagley,	<\fIbagleyd@bigfoot.com\fP>
.RE
.LP
The most updated source could be found on \fIftp.x.org\fP under
\fI/contrib/games/puzzles\fP.
