.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt
.\" (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de), Fri Apr 2 11:32:09 MET DST
.\" 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\" 
.\" Modified by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de) 24 Apr 1993
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:28:08 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Traduction 18/10/1996 par Christophe Blaess (ccb@club-internet.fr)
.\"
.TH INTRO 7 "18 Octobre 1996" Linux "Manuel de l'administrateur Linux"
.SH NOM
intro \- Introduction a la section "divers".
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Ce chapitre decrit des choses variees, comme les macros nroff, des tables de
caracteres, la hierarchie des fichiers, des concepts generaux qui n'ont de place
nulle part ailleurs.
.SH "AUTEURS"
Les noms des auteurs sont mentionnes en tete des pages de manuel,
les conditions de copyright egalement. Notez que ces conditions
peuvent varier de page en page.
