.TH FCAT 1 "27 January 1993"
.SH NAME
fcatcmd, fcat \- copy files in the FSP database to stdout
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fcatcmd
[-r]
.I filename
\&.\|.\|.
.LP
.B fcat
[-r]
.I filename
\&.\|.\|.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
For each file named in the argument list,
.B fcatcmd
reads the file and writes the content of the file to its
.B stdout.
.LP
.B fcatcmd
will perform
.B csh
file name globbing based on file and directory information
obtained from the FSP database.
.LP
Since user's command shells generally cannot do the proper globbing for
this program, it is recommended that user defines a shell alias or
function to turn off command shell globbing before running this program.
.B csh
example:
.LP
.nf
alias fcat \e(set noglob\e; exec fcatcmd \e!\e*\e)
.fi
.SH ARGUMENTS
.LP
.B -r
-- forces
.B fcatcmd
to recursively show all files in given directories.
.LP
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.LP
The following variables associate this program with a FSP database:
.TP
.B FSP_HOST
The name or internet number of the machine with the FSP server.
.TP
.B FSP_PORT
The port number of the UDP socket used by the FSP server.
.TP
.B FSP_LOCALPORT
The port number of the UDP socket used by FSP client utilities.
The only reason to define this variable is to ensure mutual
exclusion of client commands when none of the udp packet
multiplexing mechanisms are enabled during compile time.
You may pick any number not currently used for other purposes.
.TP
.B FSP_DIR
The current working directory of the client in the FSP database.
The root of the database is /.
.TP
.B FSP_TRACE
If this variable is set,
.B fcatcmd
will display the number of kilo-byte blocks transferred as transfer
progresses.  Also shown will be a measure of characters per second
so that network speed has an indicator.  This variable has no effect when the
standard output is a terminal.
.TP
.B FSP_TIMEOUT
If this variable is set, it contains the timeout value. The default value is 4.
No function if program was compiled without timeout code.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PD
fcatcmd(1), fcdcmd(1), fgetcmd(1), fgrabcmd(1), flscmd(1), fmkdir(1),
fprocmd(1), fput(1), frmcmd(1), frmdircmd(1), fver(1), fducmd(1),
fhostcmd(1), fspd(1), fsp_prof(5), ffindcmd(1)
