.TH FCD 1 "8 December 1991"
.SH NAME
fcdcmd, fcd \- change client's current working directory in the FSP database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fcdcmd
.I path
.LP
.B fcd
.I path
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
If no paths are given, / is used as the current working directory.  If
.I path
begins with a /,
.B fcdcmd
uses it as the current working directory.  Otherwise,
.B fcdcmd
appends
.I path
to the end of the current working directory.  In both cases,
.B fcdcmd
simplifies the new path and writes it to the
.I stdout.
In order for the effect of
.B fcdcmd
to be felt in subsequent FSP transactions, user needs to save the
.I stdout
output in the
.I FSP_DIR
variable.  If the change is successful,
.B fcdcmd
will display the protection setting of the new working directory.
.LP
.B fcdcmd
will perform
.B csh
file name globbing based on file and directory information
obtained from the FSP database.
.LP
Since user's command shells generally cannot do the proper globbing for
this program, it is recommended that user defines a shell alias or
function to turn off command shell globbing before running this program.
.B csh
example:
.LP
.nf
alias fcd setenv FSP_DIR \e`\e(set noglob\e; exec fcdcmd \e!\e*\e)\e`
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.LP
The following variables associate this program with a FSP database:
.TP
.B FSP_HOST
The name or internet number of the machine with the FSP server.
.TP
.B FSP_PORT
The port number of the UDP socket used by the FSP server.
.TP
.B FSP_LOCALPORT
The port number of the UDP socket used by FSP client utilities.
The only reason to define this variable is to ensure mutual
exclusion of client commands when none of the udp packet
multiplexing mechanisms are enabled during compile time.
You may pick any number not currently used for other purposes.
.TP
.B FSP_DIR
The current working directory of the client in the FSP database.
The root of the database is /.
.TP
.B FSP_TIMEOUT
If this variable is set, it contains the timeout value. The default value is 4.
No function if program was compiled without timeout code.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PD
fcatcmd(1), fcdcmd(1), fgetcmd(1), fgrabcmd(1), flscmd(1), fmkdir(1),
fprocmd(1), fput(1), frmcmd(1), frmdircmd(1), fver(1), fducmd(1),
fhostcmd(1), fspd(1), fsp_prof(5), ffindcmd(1)
.br
.ne 5
.SH BUGS
.LP
If more than one
.B path
is given, only the first one will be used.
The rest will be silently ignored.
