.TH FDU 1 "7 April 1993"
.SH NAME
fducmd, fdu  \- display the number of disk blocks used per directory or file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fducmd
[
.B \-s
]
[
.B \-a
]
[
.B \-r
]
[
.I filename
.B .\|.\|.
]
.LP
.B fdu
[
.B \-s
]
[
.B \-a
]
[
.B \-r
]
[
.I filename
.B .\|.\|.
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fdu
gives the number of kilobytes contained in all files and, recursively,
directories within each specified directory or file
.IR filename .
If
.I filename
is missing, 
.RB ` . '
(the current directory) is used.
.LP
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-s
Only display the grand total for each of the specified
.IR filename s.
.TP
.B \-a
Generate an entry for each file.
Entries are generated only for each directory in the absence of this option.
.TP
.B \-r
Recursively go down in the directory tree and show deeper entries, too.
In absence of this option the deeper directory tree branches are only counted
belonging to their parent in the top level directory.
.LP
.B fducmd
will perform
.B csh
file name globbing based on file and directory information
obtained from the FSP database.
.LP
Since user's command shells generally cannot do the proper globbing for
this program, it is recommended that user defines a shell alias or
function to turn off command shell globbing before running this program.
.B csh
example:
.LP
.nf
alias fdu \e(set noglob\e; exec fducmd \e!\e*\e)
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.LP
The following variables associate this program with a FSP database:
.TP
.B FSP_HOST
The name or internet number of the machine with the FSP server.
.TP
.B FSP_PORT
The port number of the UDP socket used by the FSP server.
.TP
.B FSP_LOCALPORT
The port number of the UDP socket used by FSP client utilities.
The only reason to define this variable is to ensure mutual
exclusion of client commands when none of the udp packet
multiplexing mechanisms are enabled during compile time.
You may pick any number not currently used for other purposes.
.TP
.B FSP_DIR
The current working directory of the client in the FSP database.
The root of the database is /.
.TP
.B FSP_TRACE
If this variable is set, some commands will display the number of kilo-byte
blocks transferred as transfer progresses.  Also shown will be an indication
of the network speed in the form of characters per second and the retries on
not answered commands.
.TP
.B FSP_TIMEOUT
If this variable is set, it contains the timeout value. The default value is 4.
No function if program was compiled without timeout code.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PD
fcatcmd(1), fcdcmd(1), fgetcmd(1), fgrabcmd(1), flscmd(1), fmkdir(1),
fprocmd(1), fput(1), frmcmd(1), frmdircmd(1), fver(1), fducmd(1),
fhostcmd(1), fspd(1), fsp_prof(5), ffindcmd(1)
