.TH FLS 1 "8 December 1991"
.SH NAME
flscmd, fls \- list the contents of a FSP database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B flscmd
[
.B unix ls flags
]
.I filename
\&.\|.\|.
.LP
.B fls
[
.B unix ls flags
]
.I filename
\&.\|.\|.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
.B flscmd
lists the content of the FSP database.  All usual
flags and usages for the unix
.B ls
command are accepted.
.LP
.B flscmd
will perform
.B csh
file name globbing based on file and directory information
obtained from the FSP database.
.LP
Since user's command shells generally cannot do the proper globbing for
this program, it is recommended that user defines a shell alias or
function to turn off command shell globbing before running this program.
.B csh
example:
.LP
.nf
alias fls \e(set noglob\e; exec flscmd \e!\e*\e)
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.LP
The following variables associate this program with a FSP database:
.TP
.B FSP_HOST
The name or internet number of the machine with the FSP server.
.TP
.B FSP_PORT
The port number of the UDP socket used by the FSP server.
.TP
.B FSP_LOCALPORT
The port number of the UDP socket used by FSP client utilities.
The only reason to define this variable is to ensure mutual
exclusion of client commands when none of the udp packet
multiplexing mechanisms are enabled during compile time.
You may pick any number not currently used for other purposes.
.TP
.B FSP_DIR
The current working directory of the client in the FSP database.
The root of the database is /.
.TP
.B FSP_TIMEOUT
If this variable is set, it contains the timeout value. The default value is 4.
No function if program was compiled without timeout code.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PD
fcatcmd(1), fcdcmd(1), fgetcmd(1), fgrabcmd(1), flscmd(1), fmkdir(1),
fprocmd(1), fput(1), frmcmd(1), frmdircmd(1), fver(1), fducmd(1),
fhostcmd(1), fspd(1), fsp_prof(5), ffindcmd(1)
.br
.ne 5
.SH BUGS
.LP
.B flscmd
is based on 4.3
.B ls
code.  It inherits any bugs found in 4.3
.B ls.
In addition, only four pieces of information for each file and directory
are available through FSP:
.B name,
.B time,
.B size,
and
.B type.
All other information that
.B flscmd
display are for compatibility purposes only
and are forged locally.
