.TH FMKDIR 1 "8 December 1991"
.SH NAME
fmkdir \- create directories in the FSP database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fmkdir
.I name
\&.\|.\|.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
For each
.I name
appearing in the argument list,
.B fmkdir
creates a directory in the client's current working directory
in the FSP database.  The new directories are owned by the
client machine, and permission for other machines to create or
delete items in these directories are initially turned off.
The client may alter the permission states with the
.B fprocmd
command.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.LP
The following variables associate this program with a FSP database:
.TP
.B FSP_HOST
The name or internet number of the machine with the FSP server.
.TP
.B FSP_PORT
The port number of the UDP socket used by the FSP server.
.TP
.B FSP_LOCALPORT
The port number of the UDP socket used by FSP client utilities.
The only reason to define this variable is to ensure mutual
exclusion of client commands when none of the udp packet
multiplexing mechanisms are enabled during compile time.
You may pick any number not currently used for other purposes.
.TP
.B FSP_DIR
The current working directory of the client in the FSP database.
The root of the database is /.
.TP
.B FSP_TIMEOUT
If this variable is set, it contains the timeout value. The default value is 4.
No function if program was compiled without timeout code.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PD
fcatcmd(1), fcdcmd(1), fgetcmd(1), fgrabcmd(1), flscmd(1), fmkdir(1),
fprocmd(1), fput(1), frmcmd(1), frmdircmd(1), fver(1), fducmd(1),
fhostcmd(1), fspd(1), fsp_prof(5), ffindcmd(1)
