.TH FPUT 1 "27 January 1993"
.SH NAME
fput \- upload files to the FSP database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fput
.br
.B fput
.I filename
\&.\|.\|.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
When used without arguments, a list of file names is read from the
standard input.  When arguments are given, the arguments are taken
to be the list of file names.  For each file named in the list,
.B fput
copies the file from the client's current working directory in the
client machine to the FSP database.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.LP
The following variables associate this program with a FSP database:
.TP
.B FSP_HOST
The name or internet number of the machine with the FSP server.
.TP
.B FSP_PORT
The port number of the UDP socket used by the FSP server.
.TP
.B FSP_LOCALPORT
The port number of the UDP socket used by FSP client utilities.
The only reason to define this variable is to ensure mutual
exclusion of client commands when none of the udp packet
multiplexing mechanisms are enabled during compile time.
You may pick any number not currently used for other purposes.
.TP
.B FSP_DIR
The current working directory of the client in the FSP database.
The root of the database is /.
.TP
.B FSP_TRACE
If this variable is set,   
.B fput
will display the number of kilo-byte blocks transferred as transfer 
progresses, as well as a characters per second rate to give an idea
of the speed of the network link.
.TP
.B FSP_LOCAL_DIR
If this variable is set, it contains the local working directory where
all files will be sent from. 
.TP
.B FSP_TIMEOUT
If this variable is set, it contains the timeout value.  The default value is
4.  No function if program was compiled without the client timeout code.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PD
fcatcmd(1), fcdcmd(1), fgetcmd(1), fgrabcmd(1), flscmd(1), fmkdir(1),
fprocmd(1), fput(1), frmcmd(1), frmdircmd(1), fver(1), fducmd(1),
fhostcmd(1), fspd(1), fsp_prof(5), ffindcmd(1)
