.TH FSPD 1 "27 January 1993"
.SH NAME
fspd, in.fspd \- server for the FSP database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fspd [-f configfile]
.LP
.B in.fspd [-f configfile]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fspd
is the server for an anonymous-ftp style archive called FSP. The main
features of this service are: connection-less model, communication
robustness, server resource protection, inter-client protection, and user
friendly interface. Please read the INFO file bundled with the FSP source
for more information. 
.LP
.SH OPTIONS
.PD 0
.TP 20
.B -f
May be used to specify an alternate configuration file.
.LP
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 20
.B .OWN.XXXXXXXX
Used to indicate the ownership of a directory.  If this file is
present in a directory, the directory is owned by the machine whose
inet number is XXXXXXXX when printed as an 8-digit hex number.

.TP
.B .README
A text file that is sent to the client when the directory is entered giving
information about the directory.  It can only be hand created by the site
administrator at this time.

.TP
.B .FSP_OK_DEL
Existence of this file in a directory grants non-owner machines
the permission to delete items from this directory.

.TP
.B .FSP_OK_ADD
Existence of this file in a directory grants non-owner machines
the permission to add items to this directory.

.TP
.B .FSP_PRIVATE
Existence of this file in a directory means that files in that
directory cannot be read, i.e. they are private.

.TP
.B .FSP_OK_MKDIR
Existence of this file in a directory grants non-owner machines
the permission to create subdirectories under the current directory.

.TP
.B .TXXXXXXXXXXXX
Transient temporary file in the FSP directory cache directory used for file
uploading.

.TP
.B .GXXXXXXXXXXXX
Transient temporary file in the FSP directory used for file
downloading through the
.B fgrab
command.

.TP
.B .HTAB_DUMP
A file created in the top directory when
.B fspd
receives an alarm signal.  It contains a listing of the active
clients in
.B fspd's
client table.

.TP
.B fspd.conf
A file containing control information about how specific features of the
server are to be used. See the 
.B example.conf
file for explicit details.

.TP
.B .FSP_CONTENT
File used to cache directory listing.  Such files are normally created
on demand in each directory that
.B fspd
exports.  If a
.B .FSP_CONTENT
file exists in a directory, but is not writable by the
.B fspd
process, then the directory cannot be listed.  If it does not exist and
.B fspd
fails in its attempt to create a
.B .FSP_CONTENT
file, then
.B fspd
will create one with a hashed name in a cache directory specified during
compile time.  Options can be set at compile time such that 
.B fspd
will create a cache file in the cache directory even if a
.B .FSP_CONTENT
file could have been created in the directory to be listed.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PD
fcatcmd(1), fcdcmd(1), fgetcmd(1), fgrabcmd(1), flscmd(1), fmkdir(1),
fprocmd(1), fput(1), frmcmd(1), frmdircmd(1), fver(1), fducmd(1),
fhostcmd(1), fspd(1), fsp_prof(5), ffindcmd(1)
