.\" Copyright (c) 1995 David Hinds <dhinds@allegro.stanford.edu>
.\" pcmem_cs.4 1.7 1996/09/08 22:49:02
.\"
.TH PCMEM_CS 4 "1996/09/08 22:49:02" "Stanford University"
.SH NAME
pcmem_cs \- PCMCIA memory card driver
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B insmod pcmem_cs.o
.RB [ pc_debug=n ]
.RB [ mem_speed=n ]
.RB [ word_width=n ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Pcmem_cs
is the Card Services driver for generic PCMCIA memory cards.  It
provides character-mode devices for accessing any card's attribute and
common memory address spaces, analogous to
.IR /dev/mem .
The attribute memory device returns only the even-numbered bytes.
.B Pcmem_cs
also provides a block-mode device for accessing common memory.
.B Pcmem_cs
will allocate a free major device number when it is loaded.  The
bitwise layout of minor device numbers is 'ddddddmm', where 'dddddd'
is the device number, and 'mm' is the mode.  Currently, the only modes
are 0 for common memory and 1 for attribute memory.  When
.B pcmem_cs
is bound to a card, it will report its major and minor device numbers
to
.BR cardmgr (8).
.PP
The block device driver for a card's common memory can be used to
create a filesystem on a card, and the device can be mounted in much
the same way as a floppy disk.  You may need to explicitly specify the
card's capacity when creating a filesystem.
.PP
Since any PCMCIA card can be accessed as a memory card,
.B pcmem_cs
can be bound to any card regardless of function, and regardless of
what other drivers might also be bound to that card.  For example,
this driver can be bound to a card and then used to read out the
contents of the card's attribute memory.
.SH PARAMETERS
.TP
.B pc_debug=n
Selects the PCMCIA debugging level.  This parameter is only available
if the module is compiled with debugging enabled.  A non-zero value
enables debugging.
.TP
.B mem_speed=n
Sets the access speed of the shared memory window, in nanoseconds.
The default is 0 (i.e., no extra wait states).  Values of up to 1000
are legal.
.TP
.B word_width=n
A flag indicating if the card should be configured for 8-bit (if 0) or
16-bit (if 1) transfers.  The default is 1 (16-bit).
.SH AUTHOR
David Hinds \- dhinds@allegro.stanford.edu
.SH "SEE ALSO"
cardmgr(8), pcmcia(5).
