.\" Copyright 1995-1996 David Engel (david@ods.com)
.\" Copyright 1995 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Most of this was copied from the README file.  Do not restrict distribution.
.\" May be distributed under the GNU General Public License
.TH LDD 1 "30 March 1995"
.SH NAME
ldd \- print shared library dependencies
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ldd
.RB [ \-vVdr ]
program ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ldd
prints the shared libraries required by each program specified on
the command line.
.PP
For a.out programs,
.B ldd
simply forks and execs each program with argc equal to zero.
The a.out dynamic linker,
.BR ld.so ,
which normally loads the shared
libraries, notices this special case and prints the dependencies.
.PP
For ELF programs,
.B ldd
forks and execs each program with the appropriate environment
variables set.
The ELF dynamic linker,
.BR ld-linux.so ,
which normally loads the shared
libraries, notices this special case and prints the dependencies.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-v
Print the version number of
.BR ldd .
.TP
.B \-V
Print the version number of the dynamic linker,
.BR ld.so .
.TP
.B \-d
Perform relocations and report any missing functions (ELF only).
.TP
.B \-r
Perform relocations for both data objects and functions, and
report any missing objects (ELF only).
.SH BUGS
.B ldd
will
.I not
work with some extremely old programs which were linked before
.B ldd
support was added to the compiler releases.
If you use
.B ldd
on one of these programs, the program will attempt to run with argc = 0 and
the results will be unpredictable.
.SH AUTHOR
David Engel.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ldconfig (8),
.BR ld.so (8),
.BR ld.so.info .
