@node Where to find more Guile/Scheme resources
@appendix Where to find more Guile/Scheme resources


@menu
* Online resources::            
* Books and papers::            
* Other documents shipped with Guile::  
@end menu

@node Online resources
@section Online resources

@table @strong


@item [FSF]
The Free Software Foundation home page @url{http://www.gnu.ai.mit.edu/}


@item [R4RS]
William Clinger and Jonathan Rees, Editors.
Revised(4) Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme.
In @cite{ACM Lisp Pointers IV} (July-September 1991).

This can be found at URL
@url{http://www-swiss.ai.mit.edu/~jaffer/r4rs_toc.html} @ref{Standard
procedures, Revised(4) Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme, ,
r4rs, Revised(4) Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme}.


@item [SCM]
Aubrey Jaffer.
SCM: a Portable Scheme Interpreter.
Version 1a5, April 1994.

This can be found at URL
@url{http://www-swiss.ai.mit.edu/~jaffer/scm_toc.html}; the reference is
@ref{Overview, , , scm, SCM}.


@item [SLIB]
Todd R. Eigenschink, Dave Love, and Aubrey Jaffer.
SLIB, The Portable Scheme Library.
Edition 2.01, for SLIB version 2a2, January 1995.

This can be found at URL
@url{http://www-swiss.ai.mit.edu/~jaffer/slib_toc.html}.  The reference
is @ref{Overview, , , slib, SLIB}.


@item [JACAL]
Aubrey Jaffer.
JACAL Symbolic Mathematics System.
Version 1a5, April 1994.

This can be found at URL
@url{http://www-swiss.ai.mit.edu/~jaffer/jacal_toc.html}.  The reference
is @ref{Overview, , , jacal, JACAL}.

@item [GNUDL]
The Gnudl documentation can be found at
@url{http://nis-www.lanl.gov/~rosalia/mydocs/}, and the anonymous ftp
directory with the latest Gnudl snapshot is
@url{ftp://nis-ftp.lanl.gov/pub/users/rosalia/}


@item [INTRO]
An online introduction to Scheme.  Brief, easy, gives a flavor for the
language.  It can be found at
@url{ftp://ftp.cs.indiana.edu/pub/scheme-repository/doc/pubs/intro.txt}


@item [GUILE-USER]
@item [GUILE-PROGRAMMER]
The online master version of this documentation can be found at URL
@url{http://nis-www.lanl.gov/~rosalia/mydocs/}


@item [GUILE-MAILING-LIST]
The hypermail archive of the (misnamed) GEL mailing list:
@email{gel@@cygnus.com} can be found at @url{http://www.cygnus.com/ml/guile/}


@item [TCL-WAR]
The network traffic triggered by Stallman's article ``Why you should not
use Tcl''; can be found at URL
@url{http://www.utdallas.edu/acc/glv/Tcl/war/}


@item [GUILE-PLANS]
The network traffic triggered by Stallman's article ``GNU Extension
Language Plans''; can be found at URL
@url{http://www.utdallas.edu/acc/glv/Tcl/war2/}


@item [LORD-GUILE-PAPER]
Tom Lord's technical paper on Guile can be found at
@url{http://www.cygnus.com/library/ctr/guile.html}


@item [YAHOO-SCHEME]
Yahoo Scheme index
@url{http://www.yahoo.com/Computers/Languages/Scheme/}


@item [YAHOO-TCL]
Yahoo Tcl/Tk index
@url{http://www.yahoo.com/Computers/Languages/Tcl_Tk/}


@item [JAFFER]
Aubrey Jaffer's home page
@url{http://www-swiss.ai.mit.edu/~jaffer/}


@item [GALASSI]
Mark Galassi's home page, @url{http://nis-www.lanl.gov/~rosalia/}


@item [POSIX]
The POSIX programmer's guide
@url{http://intertain.com/store/POSIX_desc.html}


@item [YAHOO-OpenGL]
Yahoo OpenGL index
@url{http://www.yahoo.com/Computers_and_Internet/Graphics/OpenGL/}


@item [GLUT]
The GLUT home page
@url{http://reality.sgi.com/employees/mjk_asd/glut3/glut3.html}


@item [STK]
The STk home page, at URL @url{http://kaolin.unice.fr/html/STk.html}


@item [SURFIT]
The Surfit! home page, at URL @url{http://pastime.anu.edu.au/SurfIt/}

@item [SCSH]
The SCSH home page, at URL
@url{http://www-swiss.ai.mit.edu/scsh/scsh.html}

@end table



@node Books and papers
@section Books and papers

@table @strong
@item [IEEE]
@cite{IEEE Standard 1178-1990.  IEEE Standard for the Scheme
Programming Language.}  IEEE, New York, 1991.

@item [SICP]
Harold Abelson and Gerald Jay Sussman with Julie Sussman.
@cite{Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs.}
MIT Press, Cambridge, 1985.

@item [Simply]
Brian Harvey and Matthew Wright.
@cite{Simply Scheme: Introducing Computer Science}
MIT Press, 1994 ISBN 0-262-08226-8

@item [SchemeAndArt]
George Springer and Daniel P. Friedman.
@cite{Scheme and the Art of Programming}
MIT Press and McGraw-Hill, 1989 ISBN 0-262-19288-8 (MIT Press) ISBN
0-07-060522-X (McGraw-Hill).

@item [LittleSchemer]
Daniel P. Friedman and Matthias Felleisen.
@cite{The Little Schemer.}
MIT Press, Cambridge, 1996 ISBN 0-262-56099-2.

@item [SeasonedSchemer]
Daniel P. Friedman and Matthias Felleisen.
@cite{The Seasoned Schemer.}
MIT Press, Cambridge, 1996 ISBN 0-262-56100-X.

@item [AdvancedProgrammingUNIX]
W. Richard Stevens.
@cite{Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment.}
Addison Wesley, Reading, Massachussetts, 1992 ISBN 0-201-56317-7.

@item [UNIXThreads]
Charles J. Northrup.
@cite{Programming with UNIX Threads.}
Wiley, New York, 1996 ISBN 0-471-13751-0.

@end table


@node Other documents shipped with Guile
@section Other documents shipped with Guile

Guile ships with many other documents, beyond the User and Programmer
manuals.  You can find them in miscellaneous subdirectories of
@file{$srcdir/doc} in the Guile distribution.  Some of these are useful,
others are hopelessly out of date.

@c I will just mention a few filenames you might want to find in that tree:
@c @file{goonix-orig.texi}, @file{guile-design.texi}, @file{plugin.texi},
@c @file{rx.texi}, @file{threads-design.texi}, @dots{}  These are all to be
@c found in the directory @file{$srcdir/guile-docs/misc}.
