Smail3-devel Mailing List Charter
---------------------------------

The Smail-3 Developers' List <smail3-devel@planix.com> exists to help
people with access to the Smail-3 source repository co-ordinate changes,
make releases, and administer the repository.

The membership of smail3-devel should be exactly those people who have
been given access to the CVS repository for the Smail-3 sources.  Access
to the source (more correctly defined as being a member of the group
"smail3" on the source server), mandates membership on the smail3-devel
list, so this relationship is transmutable.

The smail3-devel list may be used to discuss:

- administrivia regarding the Smail-3 source repository, release
  process, and;

- changes and features intended for inclusion in the official Smail-3
  release (either source code or documentation), which someone plans
  to implement, or has implemented.

The smail3-devel list should not be used to discuss:

- changes or features to packages other than the Smail-3 release
  (e.g., related packages like Exim, or other groups' distributions of
  Smail-3, esp. binary distributions.),

- changes which nobody has offered to implement, or

- the philosophy, administration, or use of Smail-3.  These topics
  should either go on smail3-users, smail3-wizards, or have a new
  mailing list created for them.

The topic restrictions in this charter do not reflect the development
group's future plans for Smail3; rather, they reflect a topic
classification which the group finds helpful.

Optional membership on the <smail3-bugs-fwd@planix.com> list will allow
developers to receive direct copies of the submitted PRs.  Developers
will also be expected to wander through GNATS reports periodically, fix
reported bugs and add requested features; and to update the PR status as
changes are made.

Optional membership in the list <smail3-changes@planix.com> will allow
developers to receive copies of the CVS commit logs to track actual
ongoing development.

Procedure for dealing with people who want to be developers:

People who want access are first requested to send patches and have them
reviewed by an existing developer(s).  If they submit some good ones
(preferably over a period of time, to demonstrate sustained interest),
then one of the developers can ask the smail3-devel mailing list whether
it is OK to make this person a developer.  If there are no objections,
an account will be created for the new developer.

#ident	"@(#)smail:RELEASE-3_2:Smail3-devel,v 1.2 1996/03/09 22:21:42 woods Exp"
