.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de), Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139,
.\" USA.
.\" 
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 17:00:12 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Translated Sun Jun 30 1996 by
.\"   Ignacio Arenaza (Ignacio.Arenaza@studi.epfl.ch)
.TH NULL 4 "30 Junio 1996" "Linux" "Manual del programador"
.SH NOMBRE
null, zero \- sumidero de datos
.SH DESCRIPCIÓN
Los datos escritos en los archivos especiales \fBnull\fP o \fBzero\fP
se desechan.
.PP
La lectura del archivo especial \fBnull\fP siempre devuelve fin de
archivo, mientras que la lectura del archivo \fBzero\fP siempre
devuelve \e0 caracteres.
.LP
\fBnull\fP y \fBzero\fP se crean normalmente con:
.RS
.sp
mknod -m 666 /dev/null c 1 3
.br
mknod -m 666 /dev/zero c 1 5
.br
chown root.mem /dev/null /dev/zero
.sp
.RE
.SH NOTAS
Si estos dos archivos no tienen permiso de lectura y escritura para
todos los usuarios, muchos programas se comportarán de manera extraña.
.SH ARCHIVOS
/dev/null
.br
/dev/zero
.SH "VÉASE TAMBIÉN"
.BR mknod "(1), " chown (1)
