Zgv v2.7 - GIF, JPEG and PBM/PGM/PPM viewer, for VGA PCs running Linux
Copyright (C) 1993-1995 Russell Marks.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.


Roadmap
-------

The COPYING file contains a copy of the GPL described above.

See README.src in the source distribution, or README.bin in the binary
distribution for installation details.

The CHANGES file describes the changes made since the most recent
publicly released version, and ChangeLog describes differences between
all versions, so if you are upgrading from an old version, be sure to
read that.

NB: Documentation files other than COPYING, ChangeLog, the man page
and this README are in the 'doc' subdirectory.


Description
-----------

'zgv' is a viewer which views GIF{87,89}a, JPEG/JFIF, PBM/PGM/PPM,
BMP, TGA and PNG files on a standard VGA and most SVGAs, with a
full-screen file selector front-end. It can also be used as a simple
command, with 'zgv filename', which bypasses the front-end. There are
several options; check the man page, or try 'zgv -h' for details.

'tnpic', which was formerly part of the zgv distribution, will
probably be re-introduced into the distribution (or released
separately) at a later date. I need to rewrite the JPEG writing
routines to work with the IJG's JPEG library v5 before doing this.


Share and enjoy! 

- Russell Marks (mr216@gre.ac.uk)
