.TH CFINGERD.TEXT 5 "24 Sep 1996" "cfingerd 1.3.1" "Configurable FingerDaemon"
.SH NAME
cfingerd text rules
.br
.SH "EXPLANATION"
.B cfingerd
offers different commands that can be placed in text files to display 
corresponding information.  Each command used with cfingerd in text files 
begins with a dollar-sign (or a "$").  This usually indicates to cfingerd 
that when it's displaying a file, it parses the command directly after 
that character.
.PP
If you want to display a raw "$" sign, simply put two "$" signs together, 
or "$$".
.br
.SH "TEXT COMMANDS"
The following is a list of text commands and what they do.  Each of the 
text commands can be in any text case - it doesn't matter.
.PP
.B $CENTER
will display the entire contents of the line.  This command must start at 
the beginning of the line.  This is a very common command.
.PP
.B $DATE
displays the current system date in the format of MM/DD/YY.
.PP
.B $TIME
displays the current system time in the format HH:MM A/PM (timezone).
.PP
.B $IDENT
displays the identity of the current person fingering your system.
.PP
.B $COMPILE_DATETIME
displays the date and time of which the current issue of cfingerd was 
compiled on your system.
.PP
.B $VERSION
displays the current version of cfingerd.
.PP
.B $EXEC
executes a file with "x" parameters after it.  The
.B $EXEC
command must be on a line by itself in order to function properly.
The command is executed as nobody.nogroup.
.br
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR cfingerd (8),
.BR cfingerd.conf (5),
.BR finger (1),
.BR userlist (1),
any of the included docs with the standard cfingerd distribution.
