.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de>
.\" Modified Wed Jul 21 22:10:52 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 15 April 1995 by Michael Chastain <mec@shell.portal.com>:
.\"   Added 'fchdir'.
.\"   Fix bugs in error section.
.\" Modified Mon Oct 21 23:05:29 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.TH CHDIR 2 "15 April 1995" "Linux 1.2.4" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
chdir, fchdir \- change working directory
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int chdir(const char *" path );
.br
.BI "int fchdir(int " fd ");"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chdir
changes the current directory to that specified in
.IR path .
.PP
.B fchdir
is identical to
.BR chdir ,
only that the directory is given as an open file descriptor.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
Depending on the file system, other errors can be returned.  The more
general errors for
.B chmod
are listed below:
.TP 0.8i
.B EPERM
The process does not have execute permission on the directory.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I path
points outside your accessible address space.
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I path
is too long.
.TP
.B EBADF
The
.I fd
is not a valid file descriptor.
.TP
.B ENOENT
The file does not exist.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Insufficient kernel memory was available.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
A component of the path prefix is not a directory.
.TP
.B EACCES
Search permission is denied on a component of the path prefix.
.TP
.B ELOOP
.I path
contains a circular reference (i.e., via a symbolic link)
.PP
The general errors for
.B fchmod
are listed below:
.TP 0.8i
.B EBADF
The descriptor is not valid.
.TP
.B EPERM
See above.
.TP
.B EROFS
See above.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
The 
.B chdir
call is compatible with SVr4, SVID, POSIX, X/OPEN, 4.4BSD.  SVr4 documents
additional EIO, EINTR, ENOLINK, and EMULTIHOP error conditions but has
no ENOMEM or EPERM.  POSIX.1 does not have EPERM, ENOMEM or
ELOOP error conditions.

The
.B fchdir
call is compatible with SVr4 and 4.4BSD.  SVr4 documents additional
EIO, EINTR, and ENOLINK erroir conditions.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR getcwd "(3), " chroot (2)
