.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de>
.\" Modified Wed Jul 21 21:53:01 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Jul  9 13:59:51 1996 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified Wed Nov  6 03:49:07 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.TH CHOWN 2 "21 July 1993" "Linux 0.99.11" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
chown, fchown \- change ownership of a file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int chown(const char *" path ", uid_t " owner ", gid_t " group );
.br
.BI "int fchown(int " fd ", uid_t " owner ", gid_t " group );
.SH DESCRIPTION
The owner of the file specified by
.I path
or by
.I fd
is changed.  Only the super-user may change the owner of a file.  The owner
of a file may change the group of the file to any group of which that owner
is a member.  The super-user may change the group arbitrarily.

If the
.I owner
or
.I group
is specified as \-1, then that ID is not changed.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
Depending on the file system, other errors can be returned.  The more
general errors for
.B chown
are listed below:

.TP 1.0i
.B EPERM
The effective UID does not match the owner of the file, and is not zero; or
the
.I owner
or
.I group
were specified incorrectly.
.TP
.B EROFS
The named file resides on a read-only file system.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I path
points outside your accessible address space.
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I path
is too long.
.TP
.B ENOENT
The file does not exist.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Insufficient kernel memory was available.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
A component of the path prefix is not a directory.
.TP
.B EACCES
Search permission is denied on a component of the path prefix.
.TP
.B ELOOP
.I path
contains a circular reference (i.e., via a symbolic link)
.PP
The general errors for
.B fchown
are listed below:
.TP 1.0i
.B EBADF
The descriptor is not valid.
.TP
.B ENOENT
See above.
.TP
.B EPERM
See above.
.TP
.B EROFS
See above.
.B EIO
A low-level I/O error occurred while modifying the inode.
.SH NOTES
.B chown
does not follow symbolic links.
The prototype for
.B fchown
is only available if
.B __USE_BSD
is defined.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
The
.B chown
call conforms to SVr4, SVID, POSIX, X/OPEN.  The 4.4BSD version can only be
usaed by the superuser (that is, ordinary users cannot give away files).
SVr4 documents EINVAL, EINTR, ENOLINK and EMULTIHOP returns, but no
ENOMEM.  POSIX.1 does not document ENOMEM or ELOOP error conditions.
.PP
The 
.B fchown
call conforms to 4.4BSD and SVr4.
SVr4 documents additional EINVAL, EIO, EINTR, and ENOLINK error conditions.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR chmod "(2), " flock "(2)"
