.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 1992 Drew Eckhardt;
.\"                               1993 Michael Haardt, Ian Jackson.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Wed Jul 21 22:45:39 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 21 Aug 1994 by Michael Chastain <mec@shell.portal.com>:
.\"   Fixed typoes.
.\" Modified Fri Jan 31 16:23:46 1997 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.TH DUP 2 "21 August 1994" "Linux 1.1.46" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
dup, dup2 \- duplicate a file descriptor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int dup(int " oldfd );
.BI "int dup2(int " oldfd ", int " newfd );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR dup " and " dup2
create a copy of the file descriptor
.IR oldfd .

The old and new descriptors may be used interchangeably. They share
locks, file position pointers and flags; for example, if the file
position is modified by using
.B lseek
on one of the descriptors, the position is also changed for the other.

The two descriptors do not share the close-on-exec flag, however.

.B dup
uses the lowest-numbered unused descriptor for the new descriptor.

.B dup2
.RI "makes " newfd " be the copy of " oldfd ", closing " newfd
first if necessary.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
.BR dup " and " dup2
return the new descriptor, or \-1 if an error occurred (in which case,
.I errno
is set appropriately).
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EBADF
.I oldfd
isn't an open file descriptor, or
.I newfd
is out of the allowed range for file descriptors.
.TP
.B EMFILE
The process already has the maximum number of file
descriptors open and tried to open a new one.
.SH WARNING
The error returned by
.B dup2
is different to that returned by
.BR fcntl( ..., F_DUPFD ,... )
when
.I newfd
is out of range. On some systems
.B dup2
also sometimes returns
.B EINVAL
like
.BR F_DUPFD .
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
SVr4, SVID, POSIX, X/OPEN, BSD 4.3. SVr4 documents additional
EINTR and ENOLINK error conditions.  POSIX.1 adds EINTR.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR " fcntl "(2), " open "(2), " close "(2).
