.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt <drew@cs.colorado.edu>, March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de>
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 14:51:55 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Mon Nov  4 21:02:11 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.TH NICE 2 "March 28, 1992" "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
nice \- change process priority
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int nice(int " inc );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nice
adds 
.I inc
to the priority for the calling pid.  Only the superuser may
specify a negative increment, or priority increase.
.PP
Note that internally, a higher number is a higher priority.  Do not
confuse this with the priority scheme as used by the
.B  nice
interface.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP 0.8i
.B EPERM
A non-super user attempts to do a priority increase, a numerical
decrease, by supplying a negative
.IR inc .
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
SVr4, SVID EXT, AT&T, X/OPEN, BSD 4.3.  SVr4 documents an additional
EINVAL error code.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR nice "(1), " setpriority "(2), " fork "(2), " renice (8)
