.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Fri Jun 23 01:35:19 1995 Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" (prompted by Bas V. de Bakker <bas@phys.uva.nl>)
.TH PROFIL 2 "23 July 1993" "Linux 0.99.11" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
profil \- execution time profile
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int profil(char *" buf ", int " bufsiz ", int " offset ", int " scale );
.SH DESCRIPTION
Under Linux 0.99.11,
.B profil
is not implemented in the kernel.  Instead, the DLL 4.4.1 libraries provide
a user-space implementation.

.I Buf
points to
.I bufsiz
bytes of core.  Every virtual 10 milliseconds, the user's program counter (PC)
is examined:
.I offset
is subtracted and the result is multiplied by
.IR scale .
If this address is in
.IR buf ,
then the word pointed to is incremented.

If
.I scale
is less than 2 or
.I bufsiz
is zero, profiling is disabled.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
Zero is always returned.
.SH BUGS
.B profil
cannot be used on a program that also uses
.B ITIMER_PROF
itimers.
Calling
.B profil
with an invalid
.I buf
will result in a core dump.

True kernel profiling provides more accurate results.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
Similar to a call in SVr4 (but not POSIX.1).  However, in the SVr4
version the first argument is short *, allowing higher counter values.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR gprof "(1), " setitimer "(2), " signal "(2), " sigaction (2)
