.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 1992 Drew Eckhardt;
.\"                               1993 Michael Haardt;
.\"                          1993,1995 Ian Jackson.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 00:35:52 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\"
.TH RENAME 2 "24 July 1993" "Linux 0.99.7" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
rename \- change the name or location of a file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int rename(const char *" oldpath ", const char *" newpath );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rename
renames a file, moving it between directories if required.

Any other hard links to the file (as created using
.BR link )
are unaffected.

If
.I newpath
already exists it will be atomically overwritten (subject to
a few conditions - see ERRORS below), so that there is
no point at which another process attempting to access
.I newpath
will find it missing.

If
.I newpath
exists but the operation fails for some reason or the system crashes
.B rename
guarantees to leave an instance of
.I newpath
in place.

However, when overwriting there will probably be a window in which
both
.I oldpath
and
.I newpath
refer to the file being renamed.

If
.I oldpath
refers to a symbolic link the link is renamed; if
.I newpath
refers to a symbolic link the link will be overwritten.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP 0.8i
.B EISDIR
.I newpath
is an existing directory, but
.I oldpath
is not a directory.
.TP
.B EXDEV
.IR oldpath " and " newpath
are not on the same filesystem.
.TP
.B ENOTEMPTY
.IR newpath
is a non-empty directory.
.TP
.B EBUSY
.I newpath
exists and is the current working directory or root directory of some
process.
.TP
.B EEXIST
The new pathname contained a path prefix of the old.
.TP
.B EINVAL
An attempt was made to make a directory a subdirectory of itself.
.TP
.B EMLINK
.I oldpath
already has the maximum number of links to it, or
it was a directory and the directory containing
.I newpath
has the maximum number of links.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
A component used as a directory in
.IR oldpath " or " newpath
is not, in fact, a directory.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.IR oldpath " or " newpath " points outside your accessible address space."
.TP
.B EACCES
Write access to the directory containing
.IR oldpath " or " newpath
is not allowed for the process's effective uid, or one of the
directories in
.IR oldpath " or " newpath
did not allow search (execute) permission, or
.I oldpath
was a directory and did not allow write permission (needed to update
the
.B ..
entry).
.TP
.B EPERM
The directory containing
.I oldpath
has the sticky bit set and the process's effective uid is neither the
uid of the file to be deleted nor that of the directory containing it,
or the filesystem containing
.IR pathname
does not support renaming of the type requested.
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.IR oldpath " or " newpath " was too long."
.TP
.B ENOENT
A directory component in
.I oldpath " or " newpath
does not exist or is a dangling symbolic link.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Insufficient kernel memory was available.
.TP
.B EROFS
The file is on a read-only filesystem.
.TP
.B ELOOP
.IR oldpath " or " newpath
contains a reference to a circular symbolic link, ie a symbolic link
whose expansion contains a reference to itself.
.TP
.B ENOSPC
The device containing the file has no room for the new directory
entry.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX, 4.3BSD, ANSI C
.SH BUGS
On NFS filesystems, you can not assume that if the operation
failed the file was not renamed.  If the server does the rename operation
and then crashes, the retransmitted RPC which will be processed when the
server is up again causes a failure.  The application is expected to
deal with this.  See
.IR link (2)
for a similar problem.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR link "(2), " unlink "(2), " symlink "(2), " mv "(1), " link (8).
