.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <u31b3hs@pool.informatik.rwth-aachen.de>
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 12:51:53 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 22:39:04 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
TH UMASK 2 "24 July 93" "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
umask \- set file creation mask
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/stat.h>
.sp
.BI "int umask(int " mask );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B umask
sets the umask to 
.I mask 
& 0777.

The umask is used by
.BR open (2)
to set initial file permissions on a newly-created file.
Specifically, permissions in the umask are turned off from 0666 (so, for 
example, the common umask default value of 022 results in new
files being created with permissions 0666 & ~022 = 0755 = rw-r--r--).
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The previous value of the mask is returned.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
SVr4, SVID, POSIX, X/OPEN, BSD 4.3
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR creat "(2), " open (2)
