
		   TRUSTED INFORMATION SYSTEMS, INC
                TIS FIREWALL TOOLKIT LICENSE AGREEMENT


			     Version 1.0
			  October 20, 1993


Trusted Information Systems, Inc. (TIS) has developed the TIS Firewall
Toolkit, a software kit for building and maintaining internetwork
firewalls.  The Toolkit is distributed in source code form, with all
modules written in the C programming language and runs on many BSD
UNIX derived platforms. The TIS Firewall Toolkit is a product of
Trusted Information Systems, Inc. and is being made available for use
on the following basis.

TIS grants you a license as follows to the TIS Firewall Toolkit programs:

     1.  LICENSE.  TIS grants you a non-exclusive, non-transferable
license for the TIS Firewall Toolkit programs (the "Toolkit") and its
associated documentation, subject to all of the following terms and
conditions. In accepting a copy of the Toolkit you agree to the
following terms and conditions.

     This license permits you to use, copy, and modify the Toolkit
solely for your organization's use.

     2.    LIMITATIONS ON LICENSE.

           a.    You may only use, copy, and modify the
                 Toolkit as expressly provided for in this Agreement.
                 You must reproduce and include this Agreement, and
                 TIS's  copyright notices on any copy and its
                 associated documentation.  

           b.    No part of the Toolkit may be incorporated into any
                 program or other product that is sold, or for which any
                 revenue is received without written permission of 
                 Trusted Information Systems, Inc. A commercial license
                 will be required in this case.

           c.    If the Toolkit is being provided or configured for a
                 customer, the provider must clearly state in documentation
                 and bid/proposal materials that the Firewall Toolkit
                 technologies are licensed and provided by Trusted
                 Information Systems, and a copy of this license must
                 be included with the configured system.

           d.    The Toolkit, if modified, must carry prominent notices
                 stating that changes have been made, and the dates of
                 any such changes.

           e.    All rights not expressly granted herein are reserved to
                 TIS.

     3.  NO TIS OBLIGATION: You are solely responsible for maintaining
the Toolkit and the security of the operating environment in which the
Toolkit may be used.  You are solely responsible for all of your costs
and expenses incurred in connection with the distribution of the Toolkit
or any Application Program hereunder, and TIS shall have no liability,
obligation or responsibility therefor. TIS shall have no obligation to
provide maintenance, support, upgrades, or new releases to you.

     4.  NO WARRANTY OF PERFORMANCE.  The Toolkit and its associated
documentation are licensed "as is" without warranty as to their
performance, merchantability, or fitness for any particular purpose.
The entire risk as to the results and performance of the Toolkit is
assumed by you.  Should the Toolkit prove defective, you assume the
entire cost of all necessary servicing, repair, or correction.

     5.  LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.  Neither TIS nor any other
person who has been involved in the creation, production or delivery
of the Toolkit shall be liable to you or to any other person for any
direct, indirect, special, incidental, consequential, or punitive
damages, even if TIS has been advised of the possibility of such
damages.

     6.  TERM.  The license granted hereunder is effective until
terminated.  This license shall automatically terminate without notice
if you breach any of the provisions hereof.  You may terminate it at
any time by destroying the Toolkit and its associated documentation.

     7.    GENERAL.

           a.    This Agreement shall be governed by the laws of
                 the State of Maryland.

           b.    Address all correspondence regarding this license
                 to TIS's electronic mail address
		 <fwall-support@tis.com>, or to


                      Trusted Information Systems
                      3060 Washington Road (Rt. 97)
                      Glenwood, Maryland  21738

